# Aldous Huxley — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- Contemplatives are not likely to become gamblers, or procurers, or drunkards; they do not as a rule preach intolerance, or make war; do not find it necessary to rob, swindle or grind the faces of the poor. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- ...if they practice it in the height, they will become conduits through which some beneficent influence can flow out of that other country into a world of darkened selves, chronically dying for lack of it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Trivial. Like things in a five-and-ten. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It’s as though one were below decks in a ship, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A five-and-ten-cent ship. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Mescalin opens up the way of Mary, but shuts the door on that of Martha. It gives access to contemplation— but to a contemplation that is incompatible with action and even with the will to action, the very thought of action. In the intervals between his revelations the mescalin taker is apt to feel that, though in one way everything is supremely as it should be, in another there is something wrong. His problem is essentially the same as that which confronts the quietist... _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- For if one always saw like this, one would never want to do anything else. Just looking, just being the divine Not-self of flower, of book, of chair, of flannel. That would be enough. But in that case what about other people? What about human relations? _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- In life, man proposes, God disposes. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The whole is disorganized. But each individual fragment is in order, is a representative of a Higher Order. The Highest Order prevails even in the disintegration. The totality is present even in the broken pieces. More clearly present, perhaps, than in a completely coherent work. At least you aren’t lulled into a sense of false security by some merely human, merely fabricated order. You have to rely on your immediate perception of the ultimate order. So in a certain sense disintegration may have its advantages. But of course it’s dangerous, horribly dangerous. Suppose you couldn’t get back, out of the chaos… _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And anyhow the body seemed perfectly well able to look after itself. In reality, of course, it always does look after itself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It was inexpressibly wonderful, wonderful to the point, almost, of being terrifying. And suddenly I had an inkling of what it must feel like to be mad. Schizophrenia has its heavens as well as its hells and purgatories. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Alas, this paradise of cleansed perception, of pure one-sided contemplation, was not to endure. The blissful intermissions became rarer, became briefer, until finally there were no more of them; there was only horror. Most takers of mescalin experience only the heavenly part of schizophrenia. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Yes. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And you couldn’t control it? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- No I couldn’t control it. If one began with fear and hate as the major premise, one would have to go on to the conclusion. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Would you be able, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- to fix your attention on what The Tibetan Book of the Dead calls the Clear Light? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Perhaps, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- perhaps I could— but only if there were somebody there to tell me about the Clear Light. One couldn’t do it by oneself. That’s the point, I suppose, of the Tibetan ritual— someone sitting there all the time and telling you what’s what. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- O nobly born, let not thy mind be distracted. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Verbalists are suspicious of the non-verbal; rationalists fear the given, non-rational fact; intellectuals feel that “what we perceive by the eye (or in any other way) is foreign to us as such and need not impress us deeply. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “From glass, stained or cut, we pass to marble and the other stones that take a high polish and can be used in mass. The fascination exercised by such stones may be gauged by the amount of time and trouble spent in obtaining them. At Baalbek, for example, and, two or three hundred miles further inland, at Palmyra, we find among the ruins columns of pink granite from Aswan. These great monoliths were quarried in Upper Egypt, were floated in barges down the Nile, _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- were towed across the Mediterranean to Byblos or Tripolis, and from thence were hauled, by oxen, mules, and men, uphill to Horns, and from Horns southward to Baalbek or east, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- across the desert, to Palmyra. What a labour of giants! And, from the utilitarian point _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- of view, how marvellously pointless! But in fact, of course, there was a point - a point _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the System, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- mescalin; and there is also an experience, beyond time, of union with the divine Ground.” _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- ...the ultimate Reality is not clearly and immediately apprehended, except by those who have made themselves loving, pure in heart and poor in spirit. This being so, it is hardly surprising that a theology based upon the experience of nice, ordinary, unregenerate people should carry so little conviction. This kind of empirical theology is on precisely the same footing as an empirical astronomy, based upon the experience of naked-eye observers. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “...no saint or founder of a religion, no exponent of the Perennial Philosophy, has ever been optimistic. 'Many are called, but few are chosen.' _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For long periods of history and prehistory it would seem that men and women, though perfectly capable of doing so, did not wish to pay attention to problems, which their descendents found absorbingly interesting. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...in modern industrialized societies, a few people work their way out of the prevailing occupation with matter and through the prevailing habits of analytical thought into the direct experience of the spiritual Ground of things. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Nobody has yet invented a Spiritual Calculus, in terms of which we may talk coherently about the divine Ground and of the world conceived as its manifestation. For the present, therefore, we must be patient with the linguistic eccentricities of those who are compelled to describe one order of experience in terms of a symbol-system, whose relevance is to the facts of another and quite different order. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The Cloud of the Unknowing: “This sorrow, if it be truly conceived, is full of holy desire... _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Sometimes crisis alone, without any preparatory training, is sufficient to make a man forget to be his customary self and become, for the time being, something quite different. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the aim of spiritual training is to make people become selfless in every circumstance of life, while the aim of military training is to make them selfless only in certain very special circumstances and in relation to only certain classes of human beings. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- But if the Gospels tell us very little about the “I _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- not-I, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The doctrine that God is in the world...the sacredness of nature, and the sinfulness and folly of man's overwhelming efforts to be her master rather than her intelligently docile collaborator. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The world inhabited by ordinary, nice, unregenerate people is mainly dull (so dull that they have to ditract their minds from being aware of it by all sorts of artificial 'amusements') sometimes briefly and intensely pleasurable, occasionally or quite often disagreeable and even agonizing. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...the Perennial Philosophy will do something to preserve men and women from the temptation to idolatrous worship of things in time- church-worship, state-worship, revolutionary future-worship, humanistic self-worship, all of them essentially and necessarily opposed to charity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To sum up, that mortification is the best which results in the elimination of self-will, self-interest, self-centered thinking, wishing and imagining...which means, in practice, refraining from about fifty percent of ordinary conversations...to achieve a 'holy indifference' to the temporal success or failure of the cause to which one has devoted one's best energies. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Those who choose the profession of artist, philosopher, or man of science, choose, in many cases, a life of poverty and unrewarded hard work. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the critical philosophy must mortify his commonsense... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The verbal statements of theology's more or less adequate rationalizations of experience have been taken too seriously and treated with reverence that is due only to the Fact they are intended to describe. It has been fancied that souls are saved if assent is given to what is logically regarded as the correct formula, lost if it is withheld. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Most human beings are not philosophers and care not at all for consistency in thought or action. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The orthodox doctrine of the Atonement attributes to God characteristics that would be discredible even to a human potentate, and its model of the universe is not the product of spiritual insight rationalized by philosophical reflection, but rather the projection of a lawyer's phantasy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For the Buddha of the Pali scriptures, ritual was one of the fetters holding back the soul from enlightenment and liberation. Nevertheless, the religion he founded has made full use of ceremonies, vain repetitions and sacramental rites. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- In academic circles, and among those who have been subjected to higher education, there are few fetishists and few devout contemplatives; but the enthusiastic devotees of some form of political or social idolatry are as common as blackberries. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Self-reroach is painful; but the very pain is a reassuring proof that the self is still intact: so long as attention is fixed on the delinquent ego, it cannot be fixed upon God... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is permissible to seek God provisionally under a form which is from the first recognized as merely a symbol of Reality, and a symbol which must sooner or later be discarded in favour of what it stands for. To seek Him under a settled form – settled because regarded as the very shape of Reality – is to commit onself to illusion and a kind of idolatry. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Probably all persons, even the most saintly, suffer to some extent from distractions...make use of distractions. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Beliefs _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Arbitrarily, because it happens to be convenient, because his methods do not allow him to deal with the immense complexity of reality, he selects from the whole of experience only those elements which can be weighed, measured, numbered, or which lend themselves in any other way to mathematical treatment. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- If it is legitimate to torment and kill in one set of circumstances, it must be equally legitimate to torment and kill in all other circumstances. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- First Bach fugues, a bore...But training changes the structure of our spiritual experiences. In due course, contact with an obscurely beautiful poem, an elaborate piece of counterpoint or of mathematical reasoning, causes us to feel direct intuitions of beauty and significance. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Systematic training in recollection and meditation makes possible the mystical experience, which is a direct intuition of ultimate reality. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The direct intuition of an impersonal spiritual reality, underlying all being, is in accord with the findings of the majority of the world's philosophers. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- If he is to transcend the limitations of man's private universe he must be a member of a community which gives him protection against the inclemencies of the environment and makes it easy for him to supply his physical wants. But this is not enough. He must also train himself in the art of being dispassionate and disinterested, must cultivate intellectual curiosity for its own sake and not for what he, as an animal, can get out of it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Only the disinterested mind can transcend commonsense and pass beyond the boundaries of animal or average-sensual human life. The mystic exhibits disinterestedness in the highest degree possible to human beings and is therefore able to transcend ordinary limitations more completely than the man of science, the artist or the philosopher. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- We fail to attend to our true relations with ultimate reality and, through ultimate reality, with our fellow beings, because we prefer to to attend to our animal nature and to the business of getting on in the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Epistemological Rupture
- The one-sided contemplative leaves undone many things that he ought to do; but to make up for it, he refrains from doing a host of things he ought not to do. The sum of evil, Pascal remarked, would be much diminished if men could only learn to sit quietly in their rooms. The contemplative whose perception has been cleansed does not have to stay in his room. He can go about his business, so completely satisfied to see and be a part of the divine Order of Things that he will never even be tempted to indulge in what Traherne called “the dirty Devices of the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Meanwhile I had turned, at the investigator’s request, from the portrait of Cézanne to what was going on, inside my head, when I shut my eyes. This time, the inscape was curiously unrewarding. The field of vision was filled with brightly colored, constantly changing structures that seemed to be made of plastic or enameled tin. “Cheap, _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The outer world is what we wake up to every morning of our lives, is the place where, willy-nilly, we must try to make our living. In the inner world there is neither work nor monotony. We visit it only in dreams and musings, and its strangeness is such that we never find the same world on two successive occasions. What wonder, then, if human beings in their search for the divine have generally preferred to look within! Generally, but not always. In their art no less than in their religion, the Taoists and the Zen Buddhists looked beyond visions to the Void, and through the Void at “the ten thousand things _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- How could one reconcile this timeless bliss of seeing as one ought to see with the temporal duties of doing what one ought to do and feeling as one ought to feel? “One ought to be able, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- to see these trousers as infinitely important and human beings as still more infinitely important. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- everything that happened would be a proof of the conspiracy against you. It would all be self-validating. You couldn’t draw a breath without knowing it was part of the plot. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- So you think you know where madness lies? _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- I had returned to that reassuring but profoundly unsatisfactory state known as “being in one’s right mind. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- If men and women torment their bodies, it is not only because they hope in this way to atone for past sins and avoid future punishments; it is also because they long to visit the mind’s antipodes and do some visionary sightseeing. Empirically and from the reports of other ascetics, they know that fasting and a restricted environment will transport them where they long to go. Their self-inflicted punishment may be the door to paradise. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “In vision, men perceive a profusion of what Ezekiel calls 'stones of fire', of what Weir Mitchell describes as 'transparent fruit'. These things are self-luminous, exhibit a praeter-natural brilliance of color and possess a praeter-natural significance. The material objects which most nearly resemble these sources of visionary illumination are gem-stones. To acquire such a stone _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- precious because they bear a faint resemblance to the glowing marvels seen with the inner eye of the visionary. 'The view of that world,' says Plato, 'is a vision of blessed beholders'; for to see things 'as they are in themselves' is bliss unalloyed and inexpressible.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- that existed in a region beyond mere utility. Polished to a visionary glow, the rosy shafts proclaimed their manifest kinship with the Other World. At the cost of enormous efforts men had transported these stones from their quarry on the Tropic of Cancer; and now, by way of _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- recompense, the stones were transporting their transporters half-way to the mind's visionary antipodes.” _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- I have spoken so far only of the blissful visionary experience and of its interpretation in terms of theology, its translation into art. But visionary experience is not always blissful, It is sometimes terrible. There is hell as well as heaven. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “But for poor Renee, the schizophrenic, the illumination is infernal - an intense electric glare without a shadow, ubiquitous and implacable. Everything that, for healthy visionaries, is _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- And then there is the horror of infinity. For the healthy visionary, the perceptio The literature of religious experience abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the Mysterium tremendum. In theological language, this fear is due to the incompatibility between man’s egotism and the divine purity, between man’s self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God n of the infinite in a finite particular is a revelation of divine immanence; for Renee, it was a revelation of what she calls 'the System', the vast cosmic mechanism which exists only to grind out guilt and punishment, solitude and unreality. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Sanity is a matter of degree, and there are plenty of visionaries who see the world as Renee saw it, but contrive, none the less, to live outside the asylum. For them, as for the positive visionary, the universe is transfigured - but for the worse. Everything in it, from the stars in the sky to the dust under their feet, is unspeakably sinister or disgusting; every event is charged with a hateful significance; every object manifests the presence of an Indwelling Horror, infinite, all-powerful, eternal. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “In life, even the blissful visionary experience tends to change its sign if it persists too long. Many schizophrenics have their times of heavenly happiness; but the fact that (unlike _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- the mescalin taker) they do not know when, if ever, they will be permitted to return to the reassuring banality of everyday experience causes even heaven to seem appalling. But for those who, for whatever reason, are appalled, heaven turns into hell, bliss into horror, the Clear _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “Mortification of the body may produce a host of undesirable mental symptoms; but it may also open a door into a transcendental world of Being, Knowledge, and Bliss. That is why, in spite of its obvious disadvantages, almost all aspirants to the spiritual life have, in the past, undertaken _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...from imbecility to Quantum Theory...to the intuitive knowledge of the Godhead, or to manufacture self-propelled flame-throwers...It is clear that many of the things in which modern men have chosen to pay attention to were ignored by their predecessors. Consequently the very means for thinking clearly and fruitfully about those things remained uninvented, not merely during prehistoric times, but even to the opening of the modern era. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The last end of man, the ultimate reason for human existence, is unitive knowledge of the divine Ground...very few will achieve the final end of human existence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...they who know Him most perfectly perceive most clearly that He is infinitely incomprehensible... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The saint is one who knows that every moment of our human life is a moment of crisis; for at every moment we are called upon to make an all-important decision- to choose between the way that leads to death and the spiritual darkness and the way that leads towards light and life; between interests exclusively temporal and the eternal order... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- …for some inexplicable reason, the travellers still hold fast to the religion of Inevitable Progress...every victory must be paid for...It is because the reality of Progress can never be determined that...the Perennial Philosophy, the question whether Progress is inevitable or even real is not a matter of primary importance...the important thing is that individual men and women should come to the unitive knowledge of the divine Ground, and what interests them in regard to the social environment is not its progressiveness or non-progressiveness (whatever those terms may mean), but the degree to which it helps or hinders individuals in their advance towards man's final end. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- To the extent that there is attachment to 'I,' 'Me,' 'Mine,' there is no attachment to, and therefore no unitive knowledge of, the divine Ground. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Rational intelligence makes possible unparalleled success on the one hand and, on the other, a further advance towards spirituality and a return, through unitive knowledge, to the divine ground. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...an immense increase in technical and governmental efficiency and an immense increase in scientific knowledge- each of them a result of the general shift of Western man's attention from the eternal to the temporal order... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The moralists cease to be realistic and commit idolatry inasmuch as they worship, not God, but their own ethical ideals, inasmuch as they treat virtue as an end in itself and not as t he necessary condition of the knowledge and love of God- a knowledge and love, without which that virtue will never be made perfect or even socially effective. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Our education disparages the more primitive forms of idolatry; but at the same time it disparages, or at the best it ignores, the Perennial Philosophy and the practice of spirituality. In place of mumbo-jumbo at the bottom and the immanent and transcendent Godhead at the top, it sets up, as objects of admiration, faith and worship, a pantheon of strictly human ideas and ideals. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Self-knowledge, leading to self-hatred and humility, is the condition of the love and knowledge of God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...supplying the masses with 'vital lies' calculated to make those who accepted them not only happy, but well behaved. The truth – which was that there was no meaning or value in the world – should be revealed only to the few who were strong enough to stomach it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Ethical Collapse
- Let me add, before we leave this subject, that there is no form of contemplation, even the most quietistic, which is without its ethical values. Half at least of all morality is negative and consists in keeping out of mischief. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The one-sided contemplative leaves undone many things that he ought to do; but to make up for it, he refrains from doing a host of things he ought not to do. The sum of evil, Pascal remarked, would be much diminished if men could only learn to sit quietly in their rooms. The contemplative whose perception has been cleansed does not have to stay in his room. He can go about his business, so completely satisfied to see and be a part of the divine Order of Things that he will never even be tempted to indulge in what Traherne called “the dirty Devices of the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Over against the quietist stands the active-contemplative, the saint, the man who, in Eckhart’s phrase, is ready to come down from the seventh heaven in order to bring a cup of water to his sick brother. Over against the arhat, retreating from appearances into an entirely transcendental Nirvana, stands the Bodhisattva, for whom Suchness and the world of contingencies are one, and for whose boundless compassion every one of those contingencies is an occasion not only for transfiguring insight, but also for the most practical charity. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Would it keep the evil away, if you could hold it? Or would you not be able to hold it? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Near the end of his life Aquinas experienced Infused Contemplation. Thereafter he refused to go back to work on his unfinished book. Compared with this, everything he had read and argued about and written— Aristotle and the Sentences, the Questions, the Propositions, the majestic Summas— was no better than chaff or straw. For most intellectuals such a sit-down strike would be inadvisable, even morally wrong. But the Angelic Doctor had done more systematic reasoning than any twelve ordinary Angels, and was already ripe for death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- of confidence, the hatred, anger, or malice which exclude love - are the guarantee that _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...for the lover of God, every moment is a moment crisis, spiritual training is incomparably more difficult and searching than military training. There are many good soldiers, few saints. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The slime of personal and emotional love is remotely similar to the water of the Godhead's spiritual being, but of inferior and of insufficient quantity...human beings can do something to mitigate the horrors of their situation by 'keeping one another wet with their slime.' But there can be no happiness or safety in time and no deliverance into eternity, until they give up thinking that slime is enough and, by abandoning themselves to what is in fact their element, call back the eternal waters...the modern idolaters of progress...prefer an agonizing and impossible existence on dry land to love, joy and peace in our native ocean. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Until we put an end to particular attachments, there can be no love of God with the whole heart, mind and strength and no universal charity towards all creatures for God's sake. Hence the hard sayings of the Gospels about the need to renounce exclusive family ties. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The righteous man can escape suffering only by accepting it and passing beyond it...by being converted from righteousness to total selflessness and God-centeredness, by ceasing to be just a Pharisee, or good citizen...The difficulties...are...enormous...those who 'speak with authority,' who has ever said that the road to complete deliverance was easy or the gate anything but 'strait and narrow'? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The moralists cease to be realistic and commit idolatry inasmuch as they worship, not God, but their own ethical ideals, inasmuch as they treat virtue as an end in itself and not as t he necessary condition of the knowledge and love of God- a knowledge and love, without which that virtue will never be made perfect or even socially effective. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The religious systems of the world have been built up, in the main, by men and women who were not completely selfless or enlightened. Hence all religions have had their dark and even frightful aspects, while the good they do is rarely gratuitous, but must, in most cases, be paid for, either on the nail or by installments. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Professionally, in relation to his chosen specialty, a man may be completely mature. Spiritually and sometimes even ethically, in relation to God and his neighbors, he may be hardly more than a fetus. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...many men of science have come to realize that the scientific picture of the world is a partial one – the product of their special competence in mathematics and their special incompetence to deal systematically with aesthetic and moral values, religious experiences and intuitions of significance. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- while assigning them in a supreme degree to certain arbitrarily selected parts of the totality, can only have evil and disastrous results...We have thought of ourselves as members of supremely meaningful and valuable communities – deified nations, divine classes and what not – existing within a meaningless universe.” (Ha!) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Mysticism...is unsatisfactory in moral content. The ultimate reality of the world is not moral ('God is not good') and the mystic who unites himself with ultimate reality is uniting himself with a non-moral being, therefore he is not moral. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
## Linguistic Futility
- ...I found myself all at once on the brink of panic. This, I suddenly felt, was going too far. Too far, even though the going was into intenser beauty, deeper significance. The fear, as I analyze it in retrospect, was of being overwhelmed, of disintegrating under a pressure of reality greater than a mind, accustomed to living most of the time in a cosy world of symbols, could possibly bear. The literature of religious experience abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the Mysterium tremendum. In theological language, this fear is due to the incompatibility between man’s egotism and the divine purity, between man’s self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God. Following Boehme and William Law, we may say that, by unregenerate souls, the divine Light at its full blaze can be apprehended only as a burning, purgatorial fire. An almost identical doctrine is to be found in The Tibetan Book of the Dead, where the departed soul is described as shrinking in agony from the Pure Light of the Void, and even from the lesser, tempered Lights, in order to rush headlong into the comforting darkness of selfhood as a reborn human being, or even as a beast, an unhappy ghost, a denizen of hell. Anything rather than the burning brightness of unmitigated Reality— anything! The schizophrenic is a soul not merely unregenerate, but desperately sick into the bargain. His sickness consists in the inability to take refuge from inner and outer reality (as the sane person habitually does) in the homemade universe of common sense— the strictly human world of useful notions, shared symbols and socially acceptable conventions. The schizophrenic is like a man permanently under the influence of mescalin, and therefore unable to shut off the experience of a reality which he is not holy enough to live with, which he cannot explain away because it is the most stubborn of primary facts, and which, because it never permits him to look at the world with merely human eyes, scares him into interpreting its unremitting strangeness, its burning intensity of significance, as the manifestations of human or even cosmic malevolence, calling for the most desperate countermeasures, from murderous violence at one end of the scale to catatonia, or psychological suicide, at the other. And once embarked upon the downward, the infernal road, one would never be able to stop. That, now, was only too obvious. “If you started in the wrong way, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- We should talk less and draw more. I personally should like to renounce speech altogether and, like organic Nature, communicate everything I have to say in sketches. That fig tree, this little snake, the cocoon on my window sill quietly awaiting its future— all these are momentous signatures. A person able to decipher their meaning properly would soon be able to dispense with the written or the spoken word altogether. The more I think of it, there is something futile, mediocre, even (I am tempted to say) foppish about speech. By contrast, how the gravity of Nature and her silence startle you, when you stand face to face with her, undistracted, before a barren ridge or in the desolation of the ancient hills. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Under a more realistic, a less exclusively verbal system of education than ours, every Angel (in Blake’s sense of that word) would be permitted as a sabbatical treat, would be urged and even, if necessary, compelled to take an occasional trip through some chemical Door in the Wall into the world of transcendental experience. If it terrified him, it would be unfortunate but probably salutary. If it brought him a brief but timeless illumination, so much the better. In either case the Angel might lose a little of the confident insolence sprouting from systematic reasoning and the consciousness of having read all the books. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- This lowering of what may be called the biological efficiency of the brain seems to permit the entry into consciousness of certain classes of mental events, which are normally excluded, because they possess no survival value. Similar intrusions of biologically useless, but aesthetically and sometimes spiritually valuable material may occur as the result of illness or fatigue; or they may be induced by fasting, or a period of confinement in a place of darkness and complete silence. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- ...the significance is intrinsically appalling and the light is 'the smoky light' of the Tibetan Book of the Dead, the 'darkness visible' of Milton. In the Journal d'une schizophrene, the autobiographical record of a young girl's passage through madness, the world of the schizophrenic is called le pays d'eclairement - 'the country of lit-upness'. It is a name which a mystic might have used to denote his heaven. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- And then there is the horror of infinity. For the healthy visionary, the perceptio The literature of religious experience abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the Mysterium tremendum. In theological language, this fear is due to the incompatibility between man’s egotism and the divine purity, between man’s self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God n of the infinite in a finite particular is a revelation of divine immanence; for Renee, it was a revelation of what she calls 'the System', the vast cosmic mechanism which exists only to grind out guilt and punishment, solitude and unreality. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Sanity is a matter of degree, and there are plenty of visionaries who see the world as Renee saw it, but contrive, none the less, to live outside the asylum. For them, as for the positive visionary, the universe is transfigured - but for the worse. Everything in it, from the stars in the sky to the dust under their feet, is unspeakably sinister or disgusting; every event is charged with a hateful significance; every object manifests the presence of an Indwelling Horror, infinite, all-powerful, eternal. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “The Christ of the Gospels is a preacher and not a dispenser of sacraments or performer of rites; he speaks against vain repetitions; he insists on the supreme importance of private worship; he has no use for sacrafices and not much use for the Temple. But this did not prevent historic Christianity from going on its own, all too human, way. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Certain thoughts are practically unthinkable except in terms of an appropriate language and within the framework of an appropriate system. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Mortification is painful...This fact of spiritual experience is sometimes obscured by the language in which it is described...Seen through the dung-colored spectacles of self-interest, the universe looks singularly like a dung-heap. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The poet is born with the capacity of arranging words...This is a great and precious gift; but if the poet remains content with his gift, if he persists in worshiping the beauty in art and nature without going on to make himself capable, through selflessness, of apprehending Beauty as it is in the divine Ground, then he is only an idolater. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- 'Turning to God without turning from self' – the formula is absurdly simple; and yet, simple as it is, it explains all the follies and iniquities committed in the name of religion. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- The Christ of the Gospels is a preacher and not a dispenser of sacraments or performer of rites; he speaks against vain repetitions; he insists on the supreme importance of private worship; he has no use for sacrifices and not much use for the Temple. But this did not prevent historic Christianity from going its own, all too human way. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The righteous man can escape suffering only by accepting it and passing beyond it...by being converted from righteousness to total selflessness and God-centeredness, by ceasing to be just a Pharisee, or good citizen...The difficulties...are...enormous...those who 'speak with authority,' who has ever said that the road to complete deliverance was easy or the gate anything but 'strait and narrow'? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- 'vain repetition...to use the name of God to justify what they do in pursuit of place, power and wealth. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Meditation, in other words, is the technique of mysticism...'transcendental consciousness' – the direct intuition of an ultimate spiritual reality that is perceived as simultaneously beyond the self and in some way within it. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
## Ontological Abyss
- As recently as three hundred years ago an expression of thoroughgoing world denial and even world condemnation was both orthodox and comprehensible. “We should feel wonder at nothing at all in Nature except only the Incarnation of Christ. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The outer world is what we wake up to every morning of our lives, is the place where, willy-nilly, we must try to make our living. In the inner world there is neither work nor monotony. We visit it only in dreams and musings, and its strangeness is such that we never find the same world on two successive occasions. What wonder, then, if human beings in their search for the divine have generally preferred to look within! Generally, but not always. In their art no less than in their religion, the Taoists and the Zen Buddhists looked beyond visions to the Void, and through the Void at “the ten thousand things _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- ...I found myself all at once on the brink of panic. This, I suddenly felt, was going too far. Too far, even though the going was into intenser beauty, deeper significance. The fear, as I analyze it in retrospect, was of being overwhelmed, of disintegrating under a pressure of reality greater than a mind, accustomed to living most of the time in a cosy world of symbols, could possibly bear. The literature of religious experience abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the Mysterium tremendum. In theological language, this fear is due to the incompatibility between man’s egotism and the divine purity, between man’s self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God. Following Boehme and William Law, we may say that, by unregenerate souls, the divine Light at its full blaze can be apprehended only as a burning, purgatorial fire. An almost identical doctrine is to be found in The Tibetan Book of the Dead, where the departed soul is described as shrinking in agony from the Pure Light of the Void, and even from the lesser, tempered Lights, in order to rush headlong into the comforting darkness of selfhood as a reborn human being, or even as a beast, an unhappy ghost, a denizen of hell. Anything rather than the burning brightness of unmitigated Reality— anything! The schizophrenic is a soul not merely unregenerate, but desperately sick into the bargain. His sickness consists in the inability to take refuge from inner and outer reality (as the sane person habitually does) in the homemade universe of common sense— the strictly human world of useful notions, shared symbols and socially acceptable conventions. The schizophrenic is like a man permanently under the influence of mescalin, and therefore unable to shut off the experience of a reality which he is not holy enough to live with, which he cannot explain away because it is the most stubborn of primary facts, and which, because it never permits him to look at the world with merely human eyes, scares him into interpreting its unremitting strangeness, its burning intensity of significance, as the manifestations of human or even cosmic malevolence, calling for the most desperate countermeasures, from murderous violence at one end of the scale to catatonia, or psychological suicide, at the other. And once embarked upon the downward, the infernal road, one would never be able to stop. That, now, was only too obvious. “If you started in the wrong way, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- We should talk less and draw more. I personally should like to renounce speech altogether and, like organic Nature, communicate everything I have to say in sketches. That fig tree, this little snake, the cocoon on my window sill quietly awaiting its future— all these are momentous signatures. A person able to decipher their meaning properly would soon be able to dispense with the written or the spoken word altogether. The more I think of it, there is something futile, mediocre, even (I am tempted to say) foppish about speech. By contrast, how the gravity of Nature and her silence startle you, when you stand face to face with her, undistracted, before a barren ridge or in the desolation of the ancient hills. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Near the end of his life Aquinas experienced Infused Contemplation. Thereafter he refused to go back to work on his unfinished book. Compared with this, everything he had read and argued about and written— Aristotle and the Sentences, the Questions, the Propositions, the majestic Summas— was no better than chaff or straw. For most intellectuals such a sit-down strike would be inadvisable, even morally wrong. But the Angelic Doctor had done more systematic reasoning than any twelve ordinary Angels, and was already ripe for death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- I have spoken so far only of the blissful visionary experience and of its interpretation in terms of theology, its translation into art. But visionary experience is not always blissful, It is sometimes terrible. There is hell as well as heaven. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- the mescalin taker) they do not know when, if ever, they will be permitted to return to the reassuring banality of everyday experience causes even heaven to seem appalling. But for those who, for whatever reason, are appalled, heaven turns into hell, bliss into horror, the Clear _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The best that can be said for ritualistic legalism is that it improves conduct. It does little, however, to alter character and nothing of itself to modify consciousness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In statements such as Eckhart's, God is equated with nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The saint is one who knows that every moment of our human life is a moment of crisis; for at every moment we are called upon to make an all-important decision- to choose between the way that leads to death and the spiritual darkness and the way that leads towards light and life; between interests exclusively temporal and the eternal order... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The masses,...are convinced that the scientific picture of an arbitrary abstraction from reality is a picture of reality as a whole and that therefore the world is without meaning or value. But nobody likes living in such a world. To satisfy their hunger for meaning and value, they turn to such doctrines as nationalism, fascism and revolutionary communism. Philosophically and scientifically, these doctrines are absurd; but for the masses in every community, they have this great merit: they attribute the meaning and value that have been taken away from the world as a whole to the particular part of the world in which the believers happen to be living. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...the philosophy of meaninglessness carried to its logical conclusion. Life was without significance. Values were illusory and ideals merely the inventions of cunning priests and kings. Sensations and animal pleasures alone possessed reality and were alone worth living for. There was no reason why any one should have the slightest consideration for any one else. For those who found rape and murder amusing, rape and murder were fully legitimate activities. And so on. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “The general acceptance of a doctrine that denies meaning and value to the world as a whole, _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- while assigning them in a supreme degree to certain arbitrarily selected parts of the totality, can only have evil and disastrous results...We have thought of ourselves as members of supremely meaningful and valuable communities – deified nations, divine classes and what not – existing within a meaningless universe.” (Ha!) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- ...supplying the masses with 'vital lies' calculated to make those who accepted them not only happy, but well behaved. The truth – which was that there was no meaning or value in the world – should be revealed only to the few who were strong enough to stomach it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Some people, it is true, can live contentedly with a philosophy of meaninglessness for a very long time. But in most cases it will be found that these people possess some talent or accomplishment that permits them to live a life which, to a limited extent, is profoundly meaningful and valuable. Thus an artist, or a man of science can profess a philosophy of general meaninglessness and yet lead a perfectly contented life...artistic creation and scientific research are absorbingly delightful occupations...They are proclaimed to be ends absolutely in themselves – ends so admirable that those who pursue them are excused from bothering about anything else. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
## Teleological Paradox
- ...I found myself all at once on the brink of panic. This, I suddenly felt, was going too far. Too far, even though the going was into intenser beauty, deeper significance. The fear, as I analyze it in retrospect, was of being overwhelmed, of disintegrating under a pressure of reality greater than a mind, accustomed to living most of the time in a cosy world of symbols, could possibly bear. The literature of religious experience abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the Mysterium tremendum. In theological language, this fear is due to the incompatibility between man’s egotism and the divine purity, between man’s self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God. Following Boehme and William Law, we may say that, by unregenerate souls, the divine Light at its full blaze can be apprehended only as a burning, purgatorial fire. An almost identical doctrine is to be found in The Tibetan Book of the Dead, where the departed soul is described as shrinking in agony from the Pure Light of the Void, and even from the lesser, tempered Lights, in order to rush headlong into the comforting darkness of selfhood as a reborn human being, or even as a beast, an unhappy ghost, a denizen of hell. Anything rather than the burning brightness of unmitigated Reality— anything! The schizophrenic is a soul not merely unregenerate, but desperately sick into the bargain. His sickness consists in the inability to take refuge from inner and outer reality (as the sane person habitually does) in the homemade universe of common sense— the strictly human world of useful notions, shared symbols and socially acceptable conventions. The schizophrenic is like a man permanently under the influence of mescalin, and therefore unable to shut off the experience of a reality which he is not holy enough to live with, which he cannot explain away because it is the most stubborn of primary facts, and which, because it never permits him to look at the world with merely human eyes, scares him into interpreting its unremitting strangeness, its burning intensity of significance, as the manifestations of human or even cosmic malevolence, calling for the most desperate countermeasures, from murderous violence at one end of the scale to catatonia, or psychological suicide, at the other. And once embarked upon the downward, the infernal road, one would never be able to stop. That, now, was only too obvious. “If you started in the wrong way, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Near the end of his life Aquinas experienced Infused Contemplation. Thereafter he refused to go back to work on his unfinished book. Compared with this, everything he had read and argued about and written— Aristotle and the Sentences, the Questions, the Propositions, the majestic Summas— was no better than chaff or straw. For most intellectuals such a sit-down strike would be inadvisable, even morally wrong. But the Angelic Doctor had done more systematic reasoning than any twelve ordinary Angels, and was already ripe for death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “Mortification of the body may produce a host of undesirable mental symptoms; but it may also open a door into a transcendental world of Being, Knowledge, and Bliss. That is why, in spite of its obvious disadvantages, almost all aspirants to the spiritual life have, in the past, undertaken _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “How many philosophers, how many theologians, how many professional educators have had the curiosity to open this Door in the Wall? The answer, for all practical purposes, is, None. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The last end of man, the ultimate reason for human existence, is unitive knowledge of the divine Ground...very few will achieve the final end of human existence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...it is easier for us to reach our goal if we are not handicapped by a set of erroneous or inadequate beliefs about the right way to get there and the nature of what we are looking for. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- …for some inexplicable reason, the travellers still hold fast to the religion of Inevitable Progress...every victory must be paid for...It is because the reality of Progress can never be determined that...the Perennial Philosophy, the question whether Progress is inevitable or even real is not a matter of primary importance...the important thing is that individual men and women should come to the unitive knowledge of the divine Ground, and what interests them in regard to the social environment is not its progressiveness or non-progressiveness (whatever those terms may mean), but the degree to which it helps or hinders individuals in their advance towards man's final end. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Until we put an end to particular attachments, there can be no love of God with the whole heart, mind and strength and no universal charity towards all creatures for God's sake. Hence the hard sayings of the Gospels about the need to renounce exclusive family ties. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The moralists cease to be realistic and commit idolatry inasmuch as they worship, not God, but their own ethical ideals, inasmuch as they treat virtue as an end in itself and not as t he necessary condition of the knowledge and love of God- a knowledge and love, without which that virtue will never be made perfect or even socially effective. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...the philosophy of meaninglessness carried to its logical conclusion. Life was without significance. Values were illusory and ideals merely the inventions of cunning priests and kings. Sensations and animal pleasures alone possessed reality and were alone worth living for. There was no reason why any one should have the slightest consideration for any one else. For those who found rape and murder amusing, rape and murder were fully legitimate activities. And so on. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_