# Augustine — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- ...sent to set us an example of despising worldly things for the attainment of immortality... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...a thing that was formerly lawful may become, after a time, unlawful... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...wretched is every soul bound by the friendship of perishable things. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...with joy I blushed at having so many years barked not against the Catholic faith, but against the fictions of carnal (fleshly) imaginations. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Wherefore delay then to abandon worldly hopes, and give ourselves wholly to seek after God and the blessed life? But wait! Even those things are pleasant; they have some, and no small sweetness. We must not lightly abandon them, for it were a shame to return again to them. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I was now in my thirtieth year, sticking in the same mire, greedy of enjoying things present (present goods), which passed away and wasted (distracted) my soul. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...stuck so fast in the glue-pot of pleasure... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...undertake a peaceful life, away from the crowds. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...by inward stings you disturbed me so that I was impatient until you were made clear to my inward sight...my mind was made whole by the stinging salve of wholesome grief. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- And being admonished by these books to return into myself, I entered into my inward soul, guided by you. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And yet did I not press on to enjoy my God; but was borne up to Thee by Thy beauty, and soon borne down from Thee by mine own weight, sinking with sorrow into these inferior things. This weight was carnal custom. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...for that the body which is corrupted presseth down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon many things. And most certain I was, that Thy invisible works from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even Thy eternal power and Godhead. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- That Thou wert, and wert infinite, and yet not diffused in space, finite or infinite; and that Thou truly art Who art the same ever, in no part nor motion varying; and that all other things are from Thee, on this most sure ground alone, that they are. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- For the body which is corrupted presses down the soul, and the earthly dwelling weighs down the mind, which muses upon many things. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As they rambled, these first two came upon a certain cottage where lived some of thy servants, some of the “poor in spirit _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- of such is the Kingdom of Heaven _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And I had thought that I delayed from day to day in rejecting those worldly hopes and following thee alone because there did not appear anything certain by which I could direct my course. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Thus the thoughts by which I meditated upon thee were like the efforts of one who would awake, but being overpowered with sleepiness is soon asleep again. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying, but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Are there not many men who, out of a deeper pit of darkness than that of Victorinus, return to thee... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- how high art Thou in the highest, and how deep in the deepest! and Thou never departest, and we scarcely (with great difficulty) return to Thee. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Thus did my two wills, one new, and the other old, one carnal, the other spiritual, struggle within me; and by their discord, undid (tore) my soul (apart). _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Thus with the baggage of the world...my musings on you were like the efforts of those who desire to awake...yet a man will usually defer shaking off his drowsiness when there is heavy lethargy in his limbs, and he is glad to sleep on even when his reason disapproves... _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...a certain cottage where lived some of your servants, some of the 'poor in spirit' (of such is the kingdom of heaven). _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Tell me, I pray thee, what would we attain by all these labors of ours? what aim we at? what serve we for? Can our hopes in court rise higher than to be the Emperor's favorites? and in this, what is there not brittle, and full of perils? and by how many perils arrive we at a greater peril? and when arrive we thither? But a friend of God, if I wish it, I become now at once." So spake he. And in pain with the travail of a new life, he turned his eyes again upon the book, and read on, and was changed inwardly, where Thou sawest, and his mind was stripped of the world, as soon appeared. For as he read, and rolled up and down the waves of his heart, he stormed at himself a while, then discerned, and determined on a better course; and now being Thine, said to his friend, "Now have I broken loose from those our hopes, and am resolved to serve God; and this, from this hour, in this place, I begin upon. If thou likest not to imitate me, oppose not." The other answered, he would cleave to him, to partake so glorious a reward, so glorious a service. Thus both being now Thine, were building the tower at the necessary cost, the forsaking all that they had, and following Thee. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...so, with hearts lingering on the earth, went away to the palace. But the other two, fixing their heart on heaven, remained in the cottage. And both had affianced brides, who when they heard hereof, also dedicated their virginity unto God. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- And I had thought that I therefore deferred from day to day to reject the hopes of this world, and follow Thee only, because there did not appear aught certain, whither to direct my course. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- What ails us? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- what is it? what heardest thou? The unlearned start up and take heaven by force, and we with our learning, and without heart, to, where we wallow in flesh and blood! Are we ashamed to follow, because others are gone before, and not ashamed not even to follow? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I was mad for health, and dying for life. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Thus I tore my hair out, struck my forehead, or, entwining my fingers, clasped my knee, these I did because I willed it...Yet I did not do that one thing which seemed to me infinitely more desirable. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For thou convertedst me unto Thyself, so that I sought neither wife, nor any hope of this world, standing in that rule of faith... _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- But that which is capable of more and less is mutable; whence able men, who have thought deeply on these things, have gathered that the first form is not to be found in those things whose form is changeable. Since, therefore, they saw that body and mind might be more or less beautiful in form, and that, if they wanted form, they could have no existence, they saw that there is some existence in which is the first form, unchangeable, and therefore not admitting of degrees of comparison, and in that they most rightly believed was the first principle of things which was not made, and by which all things were made. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
## Epistemological Rupture
- For there is an attractiveness in beautiful bodies, in gold and silver, and all things; and in bodily touch, sympathy hath much influence, and each other sense hath his proper object answerably tempered. Worldly honour hath also its grace, and the power of overcoming, and of mastery; whence springs also the thirst of revenge. But yet, to obtain all these, we may not depart from Thee, O Lord, nor decline from Thy law. The life also which here we live hath its own enchantment, through a certain proportion of its on towards these goods of the lowest order, the better and higher are forsaken,— Thou, our Lord God, Thy truth, and Thy law. For these lower things have their delights, but not like my God, who made all things; for in Him doth the righteous delight, and He is the joy of the upright in heartwn, and a correspondence with all things beautiful here below. Human friendship also is endeared with a sweet tie, by reason of the unity formed of many souls. Upon occasion of all these, and the like, is sin committed, while through an immoderate inclination. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...those passages in scripture...I could see that they were to be resolved by the mysteries of spiritual interpretation. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- So also, when eternity attracts us from above, and the pleasure of earthly delight pulls us down from below, the soul does not will either the one or the other with all its force, but still it is the same soul that does not will this or that with a united will, and is therefore pulled apart with grievous perplexities, because for truth’s sake it prefers this, but for custom’s sake it does not lay that aside. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- And when this power of reason within me also found that it was changeable, it raised itself up to its own intellectual principle, and withdrew its thoughts from experience, abstracting itself from the contradictory throng of fantasms in order to seek for that light in which it was bathed. Then, without any doubting, it cried out that the unchangeable was better than the changeable. From this it follows that the mind somehow knew the unchangeable, for, unless it had known it in some fashion, it could have had no sure ground for preferring it to the changeable. And thus with the flash of a trembling glance, it arrived at that which is. And I saw thy invisibility invisibilia tua understood by means of the things that are made. But I was not able to sustain my gaze. My weakness was dashed back, and I lapsed again into my accustomed ways, carrying along with me nothing but a loving memory of my vision, and an appetite for what I had, as it were, smelled the odor of, but was not yet able to eat. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- ...I hesitated to give up the world and serve you because my perception of the truth was uncertain. But still bound to the earth, I refused to be your soldier and was as much afraid of being freed from all entanglements as we ought to fear to be entangled. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...he acted very discreetly, taking care not to become known to those persons who had great reputation in the world. Thus he avoided all distractions of the mind, and reserved as many hours as possible to pursue or read or listen to discussions about wisdom. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- But now, the more ardently I loved those whose healthful affections I heard of, that they had resigned themselves wholly to Thee to be cured, the more did I abhor myself, when compared with them. For many of my years (some twelve) had now run out with me since my nineteenth, when, upon the reading of Cicero's Hortensius, I was stirred to an earnest love of wisdom; and still I was deferring to reject mere earthly felicity (wisdom), and give myself to search out that, whereof not the finding only, but the very search, was to be preferred to the treasures and kingdoms of the world, though already found, and to the pleasures of the body, though spread around me at my will. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Thou saidst that for an uncertain truth thou likest not to cast off the baggage of vanity; now, it is certain, and yet that burden still oppresseth thee, while they who neither have so worn themselves out with seeking it, nor for often years and more have been thinking thereon, have had their shoulders lightened, and received wings to fly away. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Thus also, when, above, eternity delights us (attracts us from above), and the pleasure of temporal good (earthly delight) holds us down below, it is the same soul which willeth not this or that with an entire will; and therefore is rent asunder with grievous perplexities, while out of truth it sets this first, but out of habit sets not that aside. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For he saw that the causes of things were sought for by them,--which causes he believed to be ultimately reducible to nothing else than the will of the one true and supreme God,--and on this account he thought they could only be comprehended by a purified mind; and therefore that all diligence ought to be given to the purification of the life by good morals, in order that the mind, delivered from the depressing weight of lusts, might raise itself upward by its native vigor to eternal things, and might, with purified understanding, contemplate that nature which is incorporeal and unchangeable light, where live the causes of all created natures. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Plato...perhaps entertain an idea of God as to admit that in Him are to be found the cause of existence, the ultimate reason for the understanding, and the end in reference to which the whole life is to be regulated. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For if man has been so created as to attain, through that which is most excellent in him, to that which excels all things,--that is, to the one true and absolutely good God, without whom no nature exists, no doctrine instructs, no exercise profits,--let Him be sought in whom all things are secure to us, let Him be discovered in whom all truth becomes certain to us, let Him be loved in whom all becomes right to us. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ethical Collapse
- For there is an attractiveness in beautiful bodies, in gold and silver, and all things; and in bodily touch, sympathy hath much influence, and each other sense hath his proper object answerably tempered. Worldly honour hath also its grace, and the power of overcoming, and of mastery; whence springs also the thirst of revenge. But yet, to obtain all these, we may not depart from Thee, O Lord, nor decline from Thy law. The life also which here we live hath its own enchantment, through a certain proportion of its on towards these goods of the lowest order, the better and higher are forsaken,— Thou, our Lord God, Thy truth, and Thy law. For these lower things have their delights, but not like my God, who made all things; for in Him doth the righteous delight, and He is the joy of the upright in heartwn, and a correspondence with all things beautiful here below. Human friendship also is endeared with a sweet tie, by reason of the unity formed of many souls. Upon occasion of all these, and the like, is sin committed, while through an immoderate inclination. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses, and David, were righteous, and all those commended by the mouth of God; but were judged unrighteous by silly men, judging out of man's judgment, and measuring by their own petty habits, the moral habits of the whole human race. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- If physical objects please you, praise God for them, but turn back your love to their creator. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And I enquired what iniquity was, and found it to be substance, but the perversion of the will, turned aside from Thee, O God, the Supreme, towards these lower things, and casting out its bowels (inmost treasure), and puffed up outwardly (bloated with external good). _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...a perversion of the will, bent aside from you, god, the supreme substance, toward these lower things, casting away its inmost treasure and becoming bloated with external good. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For the law of sin is the tyranny of habit , by which the mind is drawn and held, even against its will. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- But now, the more ardently I loved those whose healthful affections I heard of, that they had resigned themselves wholly to Thee to be cured, the more did I abhor myself, when compared with them. For many of my years (some twelve) had now run out with me since my nineteenth, when, upon the reading of Cicero's Hortensius, I was stirred to an earnest love of wisdom; and still I was deferring to reject mere earthly felicity (wisdom), and give myself to search out that, whereof not the finding only, but the very search, was to be preferred to the treasures and kingdoms of the world, though already found, and to the pleasures of the body, though spread around me at my will. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Thus also, when, above, eternity delights us (attracts us from above), and the pleasure of temporal good (earthly delight) holds us down below, it is the same soul which willeth not this or that with an entire will; and therefore is rent asunder with grievous perplexities, while out of truth it sets this first, but out of habit sets not that aside. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For he saw that the causes of things were sought for by them,--which causes he believed to be ultimately reducible to nothing else than the will of the one true and supreme God,--and on this account he thought they could only be comprehended by a purified mind; and therefore that all diligence ought to be given to the purification of the life by good morals, in order that the mind, delivered from the depressing weight of lusts, might raise itself upward by its native vigor to eternal things, and might, with purified understanding, contemplate that nature which is incorporeal and unchangeable light, where live the causes of all created natures. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- For if man has been so created as to attain, through that which is most excellent in him, to that which excels all things,--that is, to the one true and absolutely good God, without whom no nature exists, no doctrine instructs, no exercise profits,--let Him be sought in whom all things are secure to us, let Him be discovered in whom all truth becomes certain to us, let Him be loved in whom all becomes right to us. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Linguistic Futility
- "For it was not salvation that he taught in rhetoric (why, then, should he shrink from naming your name before the sheep of the flock), and yet that he had publicly professed: how much less then ought he, when pronouncing Thy word, to dread Thy meek flock, who, when delivering his own words, had not feared a mad multitude! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Simplicianus congratulated me that I had not fallen upon the writings of other philosophers, which were full of fallacies and deceit, 'after the beggarly elements of this world', whereas in the Platonists, at every turn, the pathway led to belief in God and his Word. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
## Ontological Abyss
- Suddenly every vain hope became worthless to me. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- At this grief my heart was utterly darkened; and whatever I beheld was death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- For I wondered that others, subject to death, did live, since he whom I loved, as if he should never die, was dead. and I wondered yet more that myself, who was to him a second self, could live, he being dead. Well said one of his friend, "Thou half of my soul"; for I felt that my soul and his soul were "one soul in two bodies": and therefore was my life a horror to me, because I would not live halved. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- And finding that Thou maddest them, they give not themselves up to Thee, to preserve what Thou maddest, nor sacrifice to Thee what they have made themselves; nor slay their own soaring imaginations, as fowls of the air, nor their own diving curiosities (wherewith, like the fishes of the seal they wander over the unknown paths of the abyss), nor their own luxuriousness, as beasts of the field, that Thou, Lord, a consuming fire, mayest burn up those dead (mortal) cares of theirs, and re-create themselves immortally. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- I panted after honours, gains, marriage; and thou mocked me. Let my soul cleave unto Thee, now that Thou hast freed it from that fast-sticking glue of death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- How wretched was it! and Thou didst irritate the feeling of its wound, that forsaking all else, it might be converted unto Thee, who art above all, and without whom all things would be nothing; be converted, and be healed. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the joy of a faithful hope lieth incomparably beyond such vanity. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- "For it was not salvation that he taught in rhetoric (why, then, should he shrink from naming your name before the sheep of the flock), and yet that he had publicly professed: how much less then ought he, when pronouncing Thy word, to dread Thy meek flock, who, when delivering his own words, had not feared a mad multitude! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- And when this power of reason within me also found that it was changeable, it raised itself up to its own intellectual principle, and withdrew its thoughts from experience, abstracting itself from the contradictory throng of fantasms in order to seek for that light in which it was bathed. Then, without any doubting, it cried out that the unchangeable was better than the changeable. From this it follows that the mind somehow knew the unchangeable, for, unless it had known it in some fashion, it could have had no sure ground for preferring it to the changeable. And thus with the flash of a trembling glance, it arrived at that which is. And I saw thy invisibility invisibilia tua understood by means of the things that are made. But I was not able to sustain my gaze. My weakness was dashed back, and I lapsed again into my accustomed ways, carrying along with me nothing but a loving memory of my vision, and an appetite for what I had, as it were, smelled the odor of, but was not yet able to eat. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The storm tosses the voyagers, threatens shipwreck, and everyone turns pale in the presence of death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “...I was so tightly held, and from the slavery of worldly business. With increasing anxiety I was going about my usual affairs, and daily sighing to you. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Thou saidst that for an uncertain truth thou likest not to cast off the baggage of vanity; now, it is certain, and yet that burden still oppresseth thee, while they who neither have so worn themselves out with seeking it, nor for often years and more have been thinking thereon, have had their shoulders lightened, and received wings to fly away. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- For he saw that the causes of things were sought for by them,--which causes he believed to be ultimately reducible to nothing else than the will of the one true and supreme God,--and on this account he thought they could only be comprehended by a purified mind; and therefore that all diligence ought to be given to the purification of the life by good morals, in order that the mind, delivered from the depressing weight of lusts, might raise itself upward by its native vigor to eternal things, and might, with purified understanding, contemplate that nature which is incorporeal and unchangeable light, where live the causes of all created natures. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
## Teleological Paradox
- "For it was not salvation that he taught in rhetoric (why, then, should he shrink from naming your name before the sheep of the flock), and yet that he had publicly professed: how much less then ought he, when pronouncing Thy word, to dread Thy meek flock, who, when delivering his own words, had not feared a mad multitude! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- And why should it be? The mind commands the body, and the body obeys. The mind commands itself and is resisted. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Plato...perhaps entertain an idea of God as to admit that in Him are to be found the cause of existence, the ultimate reason for the understanding, and the end in reference to which the whole life is to be regulated. _(REN: (Unassigned))_