# Emile Cioran — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- meanings, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- surrender to our inner fluidity without any intention of objectifying it, intimately and voluptuously soaking in our own inner turmoil and struggle? then we would feel with much richer intensity the whole inner growth of spiritual experience all kinds of insights would blend _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- and flourish in a fertile effervescence. a sensation of actuality and spiritual content would be born, like the rise of a wave or a musical phrase. to be full of one's self, not in the sense of pride, but of enrichment, to be tormented by a sense of inner infinity...” (me- Molinos says this almost exactly) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “the deepest subjective experiences are also the most universal, because through them one _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- entire past suddenly appears before them and hits them with the force of a waterfall. many become lyrical after some decisively critical experience, when the turmoil of their _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- express their inner infinity; inner lyricism finds adequate objectification only through fluid, irrational material.” (a great description of Tillich's ideas of Religious Symbolism) _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- into a region of infinite complexity, where your subjectivity tosses about in a maelstrom. to be lyrical from suffering means to achieve that inner purification in which wounds cease to be mere _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- there is no authentic lyricism without a grain of interior madness. it is significant that the beginnings of all mental psychoses are marked by a lyrical phase during which all the usual barriers and limits disappear, giving way to an inner drunkenness of the most fertile, creative kind. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- the lyrical state is a state beyond forms and systems. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- must have friends and aspirations, hopes and dreams. wouldn't it be better to retreat to a faraway corner of the world, where all its noise and complications would be heard no _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- lived to extremity all that is offered at those dangerous borders, the everyday gesture and the usual aspiration lose their seductive charm.” (Bach is needed, right Heisman?) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- only the sick man is delighted by life and praises it so that he won't collapse. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- in the world. Solitary walks are propitious to an intense process of interiorization especially in the evening, when none of the usual seductions can steal one's interest. then revelations about the _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “life is the privilege of mediocre people. only mediocrities live at life's normal temperature; the _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- others are consumed at temperatures at which life can not endure, at which they can barely breathe, already one foot beyond life.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- let him run in a fright until he falls exhausted. i warrant you that the effect is incomparably greater than any obtained through normal means. if i could, i would drive the entire world to agony to achieve a radical purification of life; i would set a fire burning insidiously at the roots of life, not to _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- too would cease to be immanent in life.” (take psychedelics correctly, Mckenna) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “it is a weariness which consumes and destroys. no effort, no hope, no illusion can satisfy you any longer. shocked witless by your own catastrophe, unable to think or to act, caught in cold and _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- heavy darkness, solitary as in moments of profound regret, you have reached the negative limit of life, its absolute temperature, where the last illusions about life freeze.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- one loses one's sense of security and the normal sensation of the immediate and the concrete. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the truly awful thing in madness is that we sense a total and irrevocable loss of life while we are still living. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “i would like instead a shower of warm light to fall from me, transfiguring the entire world, an _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- unecstatic burst of light preserving the calm of luminous eternity. far from the concentrations of ecstasy, it would be all graceful lightness and smiling warmth. The entire world should float in this dream of light, in this transparent and unreal state of delight. obstacles and matter, form and limits would cease to exist. then let me die of light in such a landscape.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- serious _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- quest for more varied forms of life, your limitless longing for inaccessible things, your elevated _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- frustration with the limits of empiricism- all become simple manifestations of an excessively exuberant sensibility, lacking the profound seriousness which characterizes the man who has penetrated the realm of dangerous mysteries.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- there are, of course, other ways, but they are accidental and individual, and do not have the same potential for revelation as illness or depression.” _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- even though belief in eternity is necessary as historical man's unique consolation, the catastrophic ending of this tragedy of life and of man in particular will demonstrate the illusion of such naive faith. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- a hypocritical serenity; in fact, they tremble with fear more than anyone else. one should not forget that philosophy is the art of masking inner torments.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “the art of dying cannot be learned, because there is no technique, there are no rules. the irrevocability of agony is experienced by each individual alone, through infinite and intense suffering. most people are unaware of the slow agony within themselves. for them there is only _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- shows him to be lonely and forsaken. the sharper our consciousness of the world's infinity, the more acute our awareness of our own finitude. in some states this awareness is painfully depressing, but in melancholy it is less tormenting and sometimes even rather voluptuous. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- when one looks at this disparity in states of melancholy, it ceases to be painful and the world appears endowed with a strange, sickly beauty.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “metaphysical existentialism is born out of ecstasy in front of the world's primordial origins; it _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- is the ultimate intoxication, ecstatic bliss in the contemplation of essence.” _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “only great and dangerous contradictions betoken a rich spiritual life, because only they _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- seems to me utter and ridiculous folly. could there be a solution, approximate of course, in a sort of superconsciousness? couldn't one live beyond (not just on this side, toward animality) all _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- beyond present-day common ideals and forms, one might breathe in a superconsciousness where the intoxication of eternity would do away with the qualms of this world, and where being would be just as pure and immaterial as nonbeing. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- splendors of this world were to vanish at once, leaving behind the dull monotony of a cemetery.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- fall from a world of abstractions into a whirlwind of feelings, into all the fantastic shapes _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- of abstract forms and ended in absolute confusion. therefore they can only philosophize poetically. in the state of absolute confusion, only the delights and torments of madness still _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- grace is an illusory state in which life negates its antinomies and transcends its demonic dialectic, in which contradictions, fatality, and the consciousness of the irrevocable temporarily vanish...transcending negativity is the essential characteristic of grace. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- only sickness gives birth to serious and deep feelings. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “pity is not only inefficient; it is also insulting. and besides, how can you pity another when you _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the experience of eternity therefore depends on intensity of subjective feeling, and the way to eternity is to transcend the temporal...every experience of eternity presupposes a leap and a transfiguration, and few and far between are those capable of the tension necessary to arrive at the blissful contemplation of the eternal. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- ...there is no true or false, only our spontaneous reactions. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- isn't intense subjectivity the way to attain universality, exactly as one enters eternity through the instant? men value solitude so little! they condemn the sterility of all that it has produced and give praise exclusively to social values, for they cherish the illusion that they have all contributed to their creation. they all aspire to great achievements through which they hope to attain immortality. as if they will not crumble into dust! _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “the height of ecstasy is the final sensation, in which you feel you are dying because of all this light and darkness. especially weird is the fact that ecstasy wipes out surrounding objects, familiar forms of the world, until ail that is left is a monumental projection of shadow and light. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- of interiority, reveals only inner shadows and glimmers of light. next to them, the charm of light _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- of metaphysical hallucination. pure essences, grasped through ecstasy, are immaterial, but their immateriality causes vertigo and obsession from which you cannot free yourself except by converting them into metaphysical principles.” _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- i will not return, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- of retreating discreetly, without a big show of revolt and hatred, you denounce, emphatically _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “not living under the fierce desert sun, with just that one thought about eternity, are we to _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “a world full of philosophers, what a terrifying prospect! they should be all wiped out so that _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- the essence of social life is injustice. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- poverty _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “to live infinity, as well as to meditate a long time upon it, is the most terrifying lesson _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- in anarchy and revolt one can ever learn. infinity shakes you to the roots of your being, disorganizes you, but it also makes you forget the petty, the contingent, and the insignificant.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- how fortunate that, having lost all our hopes, we can still leap into infinity, dive into boundlessness, participate in the universal anarchy of its whirlwind! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “absolute becoming, infinity destroys anything that is formed, crystallized, or finished. isn't _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “hence the limited perspective of active and energetic people, the banality of their thought and actions. i am not contrasting work to either passive contemplation or vague dreaminess, but to an unrealizable transfiguration; nevertheless, i prefer an intelligent and observant laziness to _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “when men can no longer bear the monotony and the banality of ordinary existence, they will find in each experience of the absolute an opportunity to commit suicide. the impossibility _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- disjunction from the world through suffering leads to excessive interiorization and, paradoxically, to such a high level of consciousness that the world, with all its splendors and glooms, becomes exterior and transcendent. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “man should stop being- or becoming - a rational animal. he should become a lunatic, risking everything for the sake of his dangerous fantasies, capable of exaltations, ready to die for all _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- achieve something or not, have faith or not, just as it is all the same whether you cry or remain _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- silent. there is an explanation for everything, and yet there is none. everything is both real and _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- in the air, a flower floating downstream! have courage when you don't need to, and be a coward _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- all efforts to attain happiness, on the other hand, are entirely futile. you can not retrace your steps once you've taken the path to unhappiness; it is the path of no return. from being happy, one can become unhappy, so there are more unpleasant surprises in happiness than in unhappiness. the world seems right to us when we are happy; when unhappy, we wish the world were anything but what it is. though fully aware that the source of unhappiness is in us, we nevertheless turn a personal defect into a metaphysical deficiency. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- sees itself in other lives as if in so many mirrors; for a psychologist, all men are fragments of himself...quickly exhausting men and their limited resources, the psychologist is easily bored, for he is not naive enough to have friends and is too self-conscious to have lovers.” _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- madness _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- madness _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- I would not want to live in a world drained of all religious feeling. I am not thinking of faith but of that inner vibration which, independent of any belief in particular, projects you into, and sometimes above God. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- If the narrative of the Fall is so striking, it is because its author describes neither entities nor symbols: he sees a God strolling in a garden, a rural God, as one exegete has so accurately characterized Him. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- To detest someone is to want him to be anything but what he is. T. writes me that I am the man he loves most in the world . . . but he urges me at the same time to forgo my obsessions, to change my ways, to become different, to break with the man I am. Which is to say that he rejects my being. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- To be is to be cornered. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- One is and remains a slave as long as one is not cured of hoping. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I do not struggle against the world, I struggle against a greater force, against my weariness of the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Get hold of yourself, be confident once more, don’t forget that it is not given to just anyone to have idolized discouragement without succumbing to it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The apparition of life? A temporary madness, a prank, a whim of the elements, a vagary of matter. The only ones entitled to grumble are the individual beings, pitiable victims of a passing fancy. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The only profound thinkers are the ones who do not suffer from a sense of the ridiculous. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In my childhood, a profound shock when I heard my father, back from the cemetery, tell how a young mother who had lost her baby daughter burst out laughing at the moment the coffin was lowered into the grave. Fit of madness? Yes and no. For when we attend a funeral and the absolute deception is suddenly unmasked, do we not have a craving to react precisely like that mother? It is too much— it is almost a provocation: nature exaggerates. We conceive that we might collapse in hilarity. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- We are all of us in error, the humorists excepted. They alone have discerned, as though in jest, the inanity of all that is serious and even of all that is frivolous. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When I happen to be satisfied with everything, even with God and myself, I immediately react like the man who, on a brilliant day, torments himself because the sun is bound to explode in a few billion years. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Everything that happens is at once natural and inconceivable. This conclusion is unavoidable, whether we consider great or trivial events. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Undeniable sign of spiritual nonfulfillment: every passionate reaction to blame, that twinge at the heart whenever we are reproached in one way or another. This is the cry of the old Adam in each of us, it proves we have not yet conquered our origins. So long as we do not aspire to be scorned, we are like the others, like those precisely whom we scorn. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We regret not having had the courage to make such and such a decision; we regret much more having made one— any one. Better no action than the consequences of an action! _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Everyone is mistaken, everyone lives in illusion. At best, we can admit a scale of fictions, a hierarchy of unrealities, giving preference to one rather than to another; but to choose, no, definitely not that... _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- To that friend who tells me he is bored because he cannot work, I answer that boredom is a higher state, and that we debase it by relating it to the notion of work. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Get hold of yourself, be confident once more, don’t forget that it is not given to just anyone to have idolized discouragement without succumbing to it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A terrible yet endurable mortification: to be born among a people that will never be mentioned. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Existence = Torment. The equation seems obvious to me, but not to one of my friends. How to convince them? I cannot lend him my sensations; yet only they would have the power to persuade him, to give him that additional dose of ill-being he has so insistently asked for all this time. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The West: a sweet-smelling rottenness, a perfumed corpse. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...Do we think of Buddha withdrawing from the world on account of his contemporaries? _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Life would become endurable only among a humanity which no longer have any illusions in reserve, a humanity completely disabused and delighted to be so. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Explosive force of any mortification. Every vanquished desire affords us power. We have the more hold over this world the further we withdraw from it, the less we adhere to it. Renunciation confers an infinite power. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- 'All is suffering' – modernized, the Buddhist expression runs: 'All is nightmare.' _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Beatitude is not compatible with this world. It is for beatitude that the hermit cuts all his moorings, for beatitude that he destroys himself. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- All our beliefs being intrinsically superficial and governing only appearances, it follows that all are on the same level, at the same degree of unreality. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Every day we should honor someone, creature or object, by renouncing them. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Thought, too, is a prejudice, a shackle. It liberates only at the beginning, when it permits us to break certain moorings; afterwards, all it is capable of is to adsorb our energy and to paralyze our impulses toward liberation. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We cling to anything, if only we don't have to tear ourselves away from that fascination accountable for our actions and even our nature, from that primal dazzle which keeps us from discerning the nonreality in everything. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is a mistake to supposed that mysticism derives from a softening of the instincts, from a compromised vitality...To get a sense of them, imagine a Hernando Cortez in the middle of an invisible geography. The German mystics were conquerors too. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- If you believe in God, you are mad without having gone mad. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Only by thinking about him constantly and mercilessly, only by setting siege to his solitude can we win rich spoils in our battle with him. If we lose heart and go halfway only, he will just be one more failure. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Theology is the negation of divinity. Looking for proofs of God is crazy idea...theology is the atheist's mode of believing. The most obscure mystical mumbo-jumbo is closer to God than the Summa Theologiae. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Bach's music is the medium of heavenly transfiguration. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Wine has brought men closer to God than theology. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For an ancient philosopher or a medieval monk, 'there is no way out' would make a constant theme for meditation. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Saintly meditation is an imprisonment in original memory. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The organ is an instrument which makes palpable God's distance from us. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There comes a moment in life when one places everything in relation to God. Anything less seems too little. Yet the fear that God may no longer be topical sometimes grabs you, and relating everything to him seems useless. The transience of the ultimate principle – a logically absurd idea, yet present in consciousness – fills you with strange terror. Could God be just a fashion of the soul, a fleeting passion of history? _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The more time has disappeared from one's memory, the closer one is to mysticism. Paradise is not possible without a defective memory. The healthier the memory is, the more it adheres to the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Saints are completely out-of-date. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- God nestles in spiritual voids. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Saintliness cannot exist without the voluptuousness of pain and a perverse refinement of suffering. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Each time weariness with the world takes on a religious form, God appears like a sea of forgetfulness. Drowning in God is a refuge from our own individuality. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- As long as you are busy with him you have an excuse for sadness and solitude. God? An official madness. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Healthy bodies and healthy minds have never been shaken by religious fears. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The failed mystic is the one who cannot cast off all temporal ties. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Life is a series of obsessions that one must do away with. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To have faith one must remain passive vis-a-vis the world. The believer must not do anything. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Disagreement is a sign of spiritual vitality. It culminates in disagreement with God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I have always wondered about people who are 'crazy for God,' who have sacrificed everything for him, first of all their minds. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Thinking is not exhaustive; there are infinite variations on the theme of God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Intimations of God's supreme indifference render man's revolt utterly pointless. To be a hero only in the eyes of men is a paltry thing. There is no consolation in dying like a hero, i.e. misunderstood by the gods. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There are many thinkers and dreamers who never feel the need for God. Sadness without the need for consolation does not guarantee a religious experience. Those limited to sadness per se are strangers to God. The absolute is a specific tonality of sadness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The task of a solitary man is to be even more solitary. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- God...is he anything but the fateful moment when our life totters on the brink of destruction? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Churches are undercover hospices. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Only ecstasy cures us of pessimism. Life would be unbearable if it were real. As a dream, it is a mixture of charm and terror to which we gladly abandon ourselves. Consciousness is nature's nightmare. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The company of mortals is, for a lucid man, pure torture. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I live on what makes other people die _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- To be alone, horribly alone, is the only imperative, and it must be obeyed at any price. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- All that if Life in me urges me to give up God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The fall – emblem of our human condition – is a nervous exacerbation of consciousness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- All that adheres to this world is trivial. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Voluntary hunger is a road to heaven; hunger from poverty, a crime of the earth. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When I realized there was no absolute except in renunciation, I dedicated myself to appearances. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Sometimes God is so easy to make out that just listening a bit more carefully to one's inner voice is enough. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Spirit means renunciation...when people, not having experienced spiritual torture, satisfy their thirst for renunciation through a derivative: heroism. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Intimations of God's supreme indifference render man's revolt utterly pointless. To be a hero only in the eyes of men is a paltry thing. There is no consolation in dying like a hero, i.e., misunderstood by the gods. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The more bored one is, the more self-conscious. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Boredom is the only argument against immortality. From it derive all our negations. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Life is a reality only for wholesome people, high priests of stupidity! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We are not when we are one with the world. Our desire to escape the world and thus be ourselves sends us on a quest for suffering. Asceticism is the paroxysm of such desire, a systematic insomnia and starvation. Self-torture intensifies subjectivity...Once you have tasted the joys of suffering, you are hooked on them for ever. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- When you become prey to an incurable boredom, illness seems a welcome distraction. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ..detachment from worldly things, a precondition for attachment to God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Only ecstasy cures us of pessimism. Life would be unbearable if it were real. As a dream, it is a mixture of charm and terror to which we gladly abandon ourselves. Consciousness is nature's nightmare. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- As long as I live I shall not allow myself to forget that I shall die... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- While reading subtle and useless philosophical polemics at the library, an irresistible longing for the desolation of deserts would sometimes grab hold of me. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man either loses himself in God or taunts him, but no one has ever remained level-headed in his presence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- All that is Life in me urges me to give up God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The dead center of existence: when it is all the same to you whether you read a newspaper article or think of God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Truly, everything can be used as argument for or against him, because everything in the world both confirms and denies his divinity. Blasphemy and prayer are both justified. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The fall – emblem of our human condition – is a nervous exacerbation of consciousness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Paleontology _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- flesh _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- those who made a great case for its insignificance: Buddha... _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The horrible being the path of liberation...In the Middle Ages, a man made a regimen of salvation, he believed energenically: the corpse was in fashion. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Today, an edulcorated religion adheres only to “nice _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the monk...No one would gainsay the fact that he is in the process of disappearing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Every concerted pursuit, even that of nirvana, if we are not free to abandon it, is a shackle as much as any other. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The world which causes it is reduced to a transitory assemblage of unreal elements. In short, our fear is intense in proportion as we give credence to the self and to the world...Only our triumph over things is real, only our realization of unreality, which our acumen constructs every day, every hour. To be delivered is to rejoice in this unreality, to seek it out each moment. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Epistemological Rupture
- “how distant everything is! i don't understand why we must do things in this world, why we _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- bring every man to the agony of life's last moments by whip, fire, or injections, and through terrible torture he will undergo the great purification afforded by a vision of death. then free him and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- it is evident to anyone who understands the multiple forms of inner drama that the grotesque hides secret tragedies, indirectly expressed. whoever has seen his face grotesquely disfigured can never forget it, because he will always be afraid of himself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “only the organic and existential thinker is capable of this kind of seriousness, because truth for him is alive, born from inner agony and organic disorder rather than useless speculation. out _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- of the shadow of the abstract man, who thinks for the pleasure of thinking, emerges the organic man, who thinks because of a vital imbalance, and who is beyond science and art.” (Huxley said this about art, I find philosophy to be 'useless speculation, rather than a concern about the Truth of existence) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- of nothingness. the average man, deprived of metaphysical understanding, does not have this consciousness of progressive advance into death, though neither he nor anyone else can escape its inexorable destiny. but when consciousness becomes independent of life, the revelation of death _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- whoever has not experienced the awful agony of death, rising and spreading like a surge of blood, like the choking grasp of a snake which provokes terrifying hallucinations, does not know the demonic character of life and the state of inner effervescence from which great transfigurations arise. such a state of black drunkenness is a necessary prerequisite to understanding why one wishes the immediate end of this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “happy the man who could abandon himself to this becoming and could absorb all the possibilities offered each moment, ignoring the agonizingly problematic evaluation _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- one kind of agony, the one immediately preceding the fall into absolute nothingness. only such moments of agony bring about important existential revelations in consciousness. that is why they expect everything from the end instead of trying to grasp the meaning of a slow revelatory agony. the end will reveal too little, and they will die as ignorant as they have lived.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- the sensation of expansion toward nothingness present in melancholy has its roots in a weariness characteristic of all negative states. this weariness separates man from the world. life's intense rhythm, its organic inner pulse, weakens. weariness is the first organic determinant of knowledge. because it creates the necessary conditions for man's differentiation from the world, weariness leads one to the perspective which places the world in front of man. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- i see a form of madness, not of knowledge, in the ecstasy of life's ultimate origins. You cannot experience it except in solitude, when you feel as if you were floating above the world. solitude is the proper milieu for madness. it is noteworthy that even the skeptic can experience this kind of ecstasy. does not the madness of ecstasy reveal itself through this odd combination of certitude and essence with doubt and despair? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “the world in which nothing is solved. to doubt and yet to live - this is a paradox, though not a tragic one, since doubt is less intense, less consuming, than despair. abstract doubt, in which _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- organically. not even the most organic and serious forms of doubt ever reach the intensity of despair. in comparison with despair, skepticism is characterized by a certain amount of dilettantism and superficiality. i can doubt everything, i may very well smile contemptuously at the world, but this will not prevent me from eating, from sleeping peacefully, and from marrying. in despair, whose depth one can fathom only by experiencing it, such actions are possible only with great effort. On the heights of despair, nobody has the right to sleep. thus a genuinely _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- desperate man cannot forget his own tragedy: his consciousness preserves the painful actuality of his subjective torment. doubt is anxiety about problems and things, and has its origins in the unsolvable nature of all big questions. if such questions could be solved, the skeptic would revert to more normal states. The condition of the desperate man in this respect is utterly different: if all _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- constitute a mode of realization for life's abundant inner flow. people who know only a few spiritual states and never live on the edge do not have contradictions, because their limited _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “rich spiritual life must know chaos and the effervescent paroxysm of illness, because in them _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- love. its grandeur and infinity impress me, but my despair is so vast that i don't even harbor the hope of death. how could i love death? one can only write about it in contradictory ways. whoever says that he knows something definite about death shows that he has not even a _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- an observation which, to my great regret, is always verifiable: only those are happy who never think or, rather, who only think about life's bare necessities, and to think about such things means not to think at all. true thinking resembles a demon who muddies the spring of life or a sickness which corrupts its roots. to think all the time, to raise questions, to doubt your own destiny, to feel the weariness of living, to be worn out to the point of exhaustion by thoughts and life... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “i might become an animal who knows the history of philosophy. as to becoming superman, that _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- not everybody loses their innocence: therefore not everybody is unhappy...disintegration implies total loss of innocence, that lovely gift destroyed by knowledge, life's enemy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- i do not know what is right and what is wrong; what is allowed and what is not; i cannot judge and i cannot praise. there are no valid criteria and no consistent principles in the world...it surprises me that some people still concern themselves with a theory of knowledge. to tell the truth, i couldn't care less about the relativity of knowledge, simply because the world does not deserve to be known. at times i feel as if i had total knowledge, exhausting the content of this world; at other times the world around me does not make any sense. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- how i would love one day to see all people, young and old, sad or happy, men and women, married or not, serious or superficial leave their homes and their work places, relinquish their duties and responsibilities, gather in the streets and refuse to do anything anymore. at that moment, let slaves to senseless work, who have been toiling for future generations under the dire delusion that they contribute to the good of humanity, avenge themselves on the mediocrity of a sterile and insignificant life, on the tremendous waste that never permitted spiritual transfiguration. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “the feeling of utter confusion! not to be able to differentiate, clarify, understand, or appreciate! such a feeling would make any philosopher a poet, but not all philosophers experience it the feeling of utter confusion! not to be able to differentiate, clarify, understand, or appreciate! Such a feeling would make any philosopher a poet, but not all philosophers experience it with significant and durable intensity, for if they did, they could no longer philosophize abstractly and rigidly. How a philosopher becomes a poet is like a drama. you _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- he who has not experienced absolute fear, universal anxiety, cannot understand struggle, the madness of the flesh and of death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- a graceful sense of existence does not lead to metaphysical revelations, to a vision of truth, to the sense of an ending which poisons every moment of life. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- eternity. they pretend that at the end of this world's misery, goodness and virtue will win but they have failed to see that, if eternity obliterates superficial pleasures, it does the same with virtue, good deeds, and moral actions. eternity does not lead to the triumph of either good or evil; it ravages all.” (me- Exactly! Ha! Vivekananda- maya, Tillich- doubt as being an intrinsic part of true faith, Kierkegaard and how the infinite scared him, how St. Therese said that thoughts concerning the Infinite brought on even deeper anguish) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “by outstripping history, one acquires superconsciousness, an important ingredient of eternity. it takes you into the realm where contradictions and doubts lose their meaning, where you _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- for him is a burning insoluble question. i am not proud to be a man, because i know only too _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- well what it is to be man. Only those who have not experienced this state intensely are proud of it, because they intend to become men. their delight is natural: there are among men some who are not far above plants or animals, and therefore aspire to humanity. but those who know what it means to be man long to be anything but.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- temptations, the fear of nothingness, and the torments of agony. his life has no tragic dimension, because enthusiasm is the only form of life totally opaque to death. even grace - so similar to enthusiasm- has less of this irrational ignorance of death. grace is full of melancholy charm; not so enthusiasm. my tremendous admiration for enthusiasts stems from my inability to comprehend how there can be such men in a world where death, nothingness, sadness, and despair keep sinister company. It makes one wonder, to see people who are never desperate.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- the biblical myth of knowledge as sin is the most profound myth ever invented. the enthusiast's euphoria is due to the fact that he is unaware of the tragedy of knowledge. why not say it? true knowledge is the most tenebrous darkness. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- life could go on naturally – blindly and irrationally. i hate the wisdom of these men unmoved by truths, who do not suffer with their nerves, their flesh, and their blood. i like only vital, organic truths, the offspring of our anxiety. those whose thoughts are alive are always right; there are no arguments against them. and even if there were, they would not last long. i wonder _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- how there can still be men searching for the truth. do wise men not yet understand that truth cannot be?” (Taoism, Sean Carroll and others discussing the multi-verse without any discomfort whatsoever) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “...infinity, both in time and space, leads to nothing. how can we accomplish anything in the future when we have behind us an eternity in which nothing was accomplished? if the world had had any meaning, it would have been revealed to us by now and we would know it. how can i continue to believe that it will be disclosed in the future when it has not been made manifest yet? but the world has no meaning; irrational at the core, it is, moreover, infinite. meaning is conceivable only in a finite world, where one can reach something, where there are limits to stop _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- since i will not die right away, nor regain my innocence, going through the same routine motions every day is sheer madness. banality must be overcome at all costs and the way cleared for transfiguration. how sad to see men bypass themselves, neglect their own destiny instead of rekindling the light they carry within them or getting drunk on their abysmal darkness! _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- To speak of suffering as the path to love means to know nothing of suffering's satanic essence. you don't climb up the steps of suffering; you climb down. they do not lead to heaven but to hell. the darkness at the bottom of the ladder of suffering is less eternal or infinite than the blinding light at the top of the ladder of joy. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- there's no salvation without the immediate. but man is a being who no longer knows the immediate. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “when we have persuaded ourselves that there is no truth. all salvation comes thenceforth, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- when you must be brave! who knows? you may still be a winner! and if you lose, does it really matter? is there anything to win in this world? all gain is a loss, and all loss is a gain. why always expect a definite stance, clear ideas, meaningful words?” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- a little knowledge is delightful; a lot, disgusting. the more you know, the less you want to know. he who has not suffered from knowledge has never known anything. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “fine psychological understanding is the product of a life of self-contemplation, a life which _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- History is the obstacle to ultimate revelation, the shackle we can strike off only if we have perceived the nullity of every event except the one that this very perception represents, and thanks to which we attain at moments to “the real truth, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And the gods— have we not turned against them as well, outraged to see that they were conscious without suffering from the fact, while for us consciousness and shipwreck are one and the same thing? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- At the climax of our Void, we will be doomed, then, to the indignity of a complete erosion, worse than a sudden catastrophe which would be honorable after all, even glamorous. Let us be confident, let us put our bets on catastrophe, more in accord with our genius and our tastes. Let us take one step further, let us suppose it to be upon us, let us treat it as a fail accompli. According to all appearances, it will include certain survivors, a few lucky ones who will have had the good fortune to contemplate its occurrence and to draw lessons from it. Their first concern will certainly be to abolish the memory of the old humanity, of all the enterprises that have discredited and destroyed it. Turning against the cities, they will seek to complete their ruin, to erase all traces of them. One rachitic tree will be worth more in their eyes than a museum or a temple. No more schools; on the other hand, courses in oblivion and unlearning to celebrate the virtues of inattention and the delights of amnesia. The disgust inspired by the sight of any book, frivolous or serious, will extend to all Knowledge, which will be referred to with embarrassment or dread as if it were an obscenity or a scourge. To bother with philosophy, to elaborate a system, to attach oneself to it and believe in it, will appear as an impiety, a provocation, and a betrayal, a criminal complicity with the past. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- It is doubtless distressing that we must confront the final phase of the historical process at the moment when, having liquidated our old beliefs, we lack any metaphysical assets, any substantial reserves of the Absolute. Surprised by the death agony, dispossessed of everything, we skirt that flattering nightmare experienced by all who had the privilege of finding themselves at the heart of a conspicuous débâcle. If, with the courage to look things in the face, we had that of suspending our course, if only for an instant, this respite, this pause on a global scale, would suffice to reveal to us the nature of the precipice over which we hang, and the resulting dread would quickly be converted into prayers or lamentations, into a salutary convulsion. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- What advantage would having faith be to me, since I understand Meister Eckhart just as well without it? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Friendship being incompatible with truth, only the mute dialogue with our enemies is fruitful. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A Tantric ritual: during the initiation ceremony, you are given a mirror in which you see your own image. Contemplating it, you realize you are nothing but that, i.e., nothing. To what end, so many pretenses, so many airs and graces, when it is so easy to comprehend one’s insignificance? _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- In flawed families, a scion appears who dedicates himself to the truth and who ruins himself in its pursuit. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Once one has understood, it would be best to drop dead on the spot. What is to understand? What we have really grasped cannot be expressed in any way at all, and cannot be transmitted to anyone else, not even to oneself, so that we die without knowing the exact nature of our own secret. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When I see someone fighting for some cause or other, I try to know what is happening in his mind and what can be the source of his obvious lack of maturity. The rejection of resignation is perhaps a sign of “life, _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- I abide by appearances, I note what they are and adhere to them only to the degree that, as a living being, I cannot do otherwise. I act like other people, I perform the same deeds they do, but I identify myself with neither my words nor my actions, I bow to customs and laws, I pretend to share the convictions, i.e., the prejudices, of my fellow citizens, while knowing that in the last analysis I am quite as unreal as they. What then is the skeptic? —A ghost: a conformist ghost. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- All things considered, philosophy is not so contemptible: to hide oneself under more or less objective truths, to disclose oppressions that apparently do not concern us, to cultivate faceless dreads, to camouflage calls for help by the splendors of language . . . Philosophy? An anonymous cry... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- As soon as one returns to Doubt (if it could be said that one has ever left it), undertaking anything at all seems not so much useless as extravagant. No joyful companion, Doubt works deep within you like a disease or, even more effectively, like a faith. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- After all, why should ordinary people want to contemplate the End, especially when we see the condition of those who do? _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The further men get from God, the farther they advance into the knowledge of religions. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The perception of the Precarious raised to the level of vision, of mystical experience. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- And to understand signifies to discern the degree of awakening to which a being has achieved, in his capacity to perceive the sum of unreality which enters into each phenomenon. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Even the Buddha after illumination was only Siddhartha Gautama with knowledge in addition. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- God's greatest advantage is that one can say or think anything about him. The less you connect your thoughts, abandoning them to contradictions, the more you risk coming near the truth. God benefits from the peripheries of logic. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- He who does not think of God will forever remain a stranger to himself. God is self-knowledge, and universal history is a description of his various forms. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...we no longer know how to prepare ourselves for death. No one cultivates death in himself any longer, it happens over and above him. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- God's greatest advantage is that one can say or think anything about him. The less you connect your thoughts, abandoning them to contradictions, the more you risk coming near the truth. God benefits from the peripheries of logic. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Compared to philosophers, saints know nothing. Yet they know everything. Compared to Aristotle, any saint is illiterate. What makes us then believe that we might learn more from the latter? Because all of the philosophers put together are not worth a single saint. Philosophy has no answers. Compared to philosophy, saintliness is an exact science. It gives us precise answers to questions that philosophers do not even dare consider. Its method is suffering and its goal is God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A philosopher is saved from mediocrity either through skepticism or mysticism, the two forms of despair in front of knowledge. Mysticism is an escape from knowledge, and skepticism is knowledge without hope. In either instance, the world is not a solution. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Mysticism revolves around the passion for ecstasy and a horror of the void. One cannot know one without the other...Once it has totally rejected the world, the soul is ripe for a long-term and fecund emptiness…One sees nothing except nothingness. And the latter has become everything. Ecstasy is plenitude in a void, a full void. It is an overwhelming frisson which convulses nothingness, an invasion of being in absolute emptiness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Listening to Bach, one sees God come into being. His music generates divinity. After a Bach...one feels that God must exists. Otherwise, Bach's music would be only heartrending illusion. Theologians and philosophers wasted so many days and nights searching for proofs of his existence, ignoring the only valid one: Bach. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...life is an uninterrupted religious crisis, superficial for believers and shattering for doubters. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To doubt God is to be self-ironical. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is so much knowledge in melancholy that we call it a vice. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The course of meditation: you begin by ignoring the object and end by ignoring the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- I think of Man and see only shadows; I think of shadows and see only myself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The vision I have of it is the vision of a gravedigger infected with metaphysics. Doubtless I am wrong to keep thinking about it; one cannot live and lay much stress of it: a colossus would perish in the attempt. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- In order to vanquish attachments...we should have to contemplate the ultimate nudity of a human being...wallow in the horror...in his physiology of an imminent corpse. The vision would be a methodical, a controlled obsession, particularly salutary in ordeals. The skeleton excites us to serenity; the cadaver, to renunciation. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- In order to conceive, and to steep ourselves in, unreality, we must have it constantly present to our minds. The day we feel it, see it, everything becomes unreal, except that unreality which alone makes existence tolerable. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To think without being any the wiser, or rather not to think at all but to remain there and to devour the silence – that is where perspicacity should lead. No pleasure is comparable to that of knowing we don't think. It will be objected, Isn't knowing we don't think still thinking? No doubt, but the wretchedness of thought is surmounted for the time that, instead of leaping from idea to idea, we remain deliberately within just one, one which rejects all the rest and which dissolves itself as soon as it takes for its content its own absence. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Why then, knowing that in the last resort everything is unreal, still be carried away for such trifles? I am carried away, granted, but I am not involved, which is to say that I take no real interest. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Awakening is independent of intellectual capacities: a genius can be a dunce, spiritually speaking. Moreover, knowledge as such gets on no further. An illiterate can possess 'the eye of understanding' and thereby find himself above and beyond any scholar. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ethical Collapse
- inner being reaches paroxysm. thus people who are normally inclined toward objectivity and impersonality, strangers both to themselves and to reality, once they become prisoners of love, experience feelings which actualize all their personal resources. the fact that almost everybody writes poetry when in love proves that the resources of conceptual thinking are too poor to _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- “the passion for the absurd. there are no arguments. Can anyone who has reached the limit bother with arguments, causes, effects, moral considerations, and so forth? of course not. for _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- such a person there are only unmotivated motives for living. on the heights of despair, the passion for the absurd is the only thing that can still throw a demonic light on chaos. When all the current reasons- moral, esthetic, religious, social, and so on - no longer guide one's life, how can one sustain life without succumbing to nothingness? Only by a connection with the absurd, by love of absolute uselessness, loving something which does not have substance but which simulates an illusion of life.” (sounds like Tillich's concrete religious symbols) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- i feel that i am dying of solitude, of love, of despair, of hatred, of all that this world offers me. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “what else in life could still move such a person? what seductions? some say: self-sacrifice for humanity, the public good, the cult of the beautiful, and so forth. i like only those people who have done away with all that - even for a short time. only they have lived in an absolute _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- how good it would be if one could die by throwing oneself into an infinite void! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- only those who truly suffer are capable of of genuine content and infinite seriousness...there are many who would gladly give up metaphysical revelations, obtained through despair, agony, and death, in exchange for a naive love or the voluptuous unconsciousness of dance. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- inner temperatures. nobody who does not love chaos is a creator, and whoever is contemptuous of illness must not speak of the spirit.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- love. its grandeur and infinity impress me, but my despair is so vast that i don't even harbor the hope of death. how could i love death? one can only write about it in contradictory ways. whoever says that he knows something definite about death shows that he has not even a _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- what should i do? work for a social and political system, make a girl miserable? hunt for weaknesses in philosophical systems, fight for moral and esthetic ideals? it's all too little. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- how i would love one day to see all people, young and old, sad or happy, men and women, married or not, serious or superficial leave their homes and their work places, relinquish their duties and responsibilities, gather in the streets and refuse to do anything anymore. at that moment, let slaves to senseless work, who have been toiling for future generations under the dire delusion that they contribute to the good of humanity, avenge themselves on the mediocrity of a sterile and insignificant life, on the tremendous waste that never permitted spiritual transfiguration. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “even today nobody can tell what is right or what is wrong...since reality is essentially irrational, why set rules, why distinguish the right from the wrong? morality cannot be saved; it's a mistake to believe otherwise. yet there are those who maintain that in this world pleasure and sin are minor satisfactions which enjoy only a brief triumph and that only good deeds partake of _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- eternity. they pretend that at the end of this world's misery, goodness and virtue will win but they have failed to see that, if eternity obliterates superficial pleasures, it does the same with virtue, good deeds, and moral actions. eternity does not lead to the triumph of either good or evil; it ravages all.” (me- Exactly! Ha! Vivekananda- maya, Tillich- doubt as being an intrinsic part of true faith, Kierkegaard and how the infinite scared him, how St. Therese said that thoughts concerning the Infinite brought on even deeper anguish) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- cannot solve anything, because nothing satisfies him. you will find in him neither the enthusiast's gift of abandon, his naive irrationality, nor the charming paradox of love in its purest state.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the biblical myth of knowledge as sin is the most profound myth ever invented. the enthusiast's euphoria is due to the fact that he is unaware of the tragedy of knowledge. why not say it? true knowledge is the most tenebrous darkness. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- i have always wondered why those who have produced masterpieces in these domains have not all gone mad. music more than any other art requires so much concentration that one could easily, after creative moments, lose one's mind. all great composers ought to either commit suicide or become insane at the height of their creative powers. are not all those aspiring to infinity on the road to madness? normality, abnormality, are notions that no longer mean anything. let us live in the ecstasy of infinity, let us love that which is boundless, let us destroy forms... _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “sadness, the inebriation and excitement of last moments. is not everything final? what is the anxiety of nothingness if not the perverse joy of our final sadness, our exalted love for the eternity of nothingness and the transience of existence? can it really be that for us existence means exile, and nothingness, home? i must struggle against myself, fly into a rage at my destiny, blow up all _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- To speak of suffering as the path to love means to know nothing of suffering's satanic essence. you don't climb up the steps of suffering; you climb down. they do not lead to heaven but to hell. the darkness at the bottom of the ladder of suffering is less eternal or infinite than the blinding light at the top of the ladder of joy. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- for those deprived of faith, an excess of subjectivity leads either to megalomania or self-denigration, to too much love or too much self-hatred. Either way, you spend yourself ahead of time. subjectivity makes you either god or satan. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- in one's joy? What does it matter whether our tears come from pleasure or pain? love your unhappiness and hate your happiness, mix everything up, scramble it all! be a snowflake dancing _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “could morality still serve such a being- probably the most generous because also the most absurd, capable of renouncing the whole world, and consequently giving away all that can be _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- given? generosity is incompatible with morality, that rationalization of customs, that mechanization of life. Any generous act is absurd, a renunciation unheard of in the _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- ordinary man, who drapes himself in morality in order to hide his vulgar nullity. all that is truly moral begins when we have done with morality. the pettiness of its laws is never more evident than in its condemnation of vice, the expression of carnal tragedy born from the presence of the spirit in the flesh. vice is the tragedy of the flesh, the flesh bursting out of its own fatality, attempting to break the shackles imprisoning its passionate impulses.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To escape our fate— what is the good of striving for that? Not that we must despair of finding a substitute ending. Yet it must be a likely one, one that has some chance of being realized. Man being what he is, can we admit that he might be granted the opportunity of subsiding in the peace of decay, amid the benefits of decrepitude? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Since in us has awakened the evil that slumbered in the remainder of the living, it remains for us to destroy ourselves so that they might be saved. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- At the climax of our Void, we will be doomed, then, to the indignity of a complete erosion, worse than a sudden catastrophe which would be honorable after all, even glamorous. Let us be confident, let us put our bets on catastrophe, more in accord with our genius and our tastes. Let us take one step further, let us suppose it to be upon us, let us treat it as a fail accompli. According to all appearances, it will include certain survivors, a few lucky ones who will have had the good fortune to contemplate its occurrence and to draw lessons from it. Their first concern will certainly be to abolish the memory of the old humanity, of all the enterprises that have discredited and destroyed it. Turning against the cities, they will seek to complete their ruin, to erase all traces of them. One rachitic tree will be worth more in their eyes than a museum or a temple. No more schools; on the other hand, courses in oblivion and unlearning to celebrate the virtues of inattention and the delights of amnesia. The disgust inspired by the sight of any book, frivolous or serious, will extend to all Knowledge, which will be referred to with embarrassment or dread as if it were an obscenity or a scourge. To bother with philosophy, to elaborate a system, to attach oneself to it and believe in it, will appear as an impiety, a provocation, and a betrayal, a criminal complicity with the past. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- I have less and less discernment as to what is good and what evil. When I make no distinction whatever between the two, supposing I reach this point some day— what a step forward! Toward what? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To try curing someone of a “vice, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Life is more and less than boredom, though it is in boredom and by boredom that we discern what life is worth. Once boredom insinuates itself into you, once you fall under its invisible hegemony, everything else seems insignificant. The same might be said of suffering. Yes, indeed. But suffering is localized, whereas boredom evokes an evil without site or support, only that indefinable nothing that erodes you . . . A pure erosion, whose imperceptible effect slowly transforms you into a ruin unnoticed by others and almost unnoticed by yourself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To die at sixty or at eighty is harder than at ten or at thirty. Habituation to life, there’s the rub. For life is a vice— the greatest one of all. Which explains why we have so much difficulty ridding ourselves of it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Of two enemies at odds, it is unlikely that only one should be in the right. When we listen to them one after the other, we yield, if we are in good faith, to the arguments of each, at the risk of looking like a weathercock, of being, in short, too much of a philosopher. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- What is evil? It is what is done with a view to happiness in this world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Saintliness is a negative sort of perfection...There are illnesses that can only be treated with a good dose of divinity, but I prefer the alleviation of pain provided by earthly tranquilizers. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The obsession with God dislodges earthly love. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is so much knowledge in melancholy that we call it a vice. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Linguistic Futility
- i'm speaking of a precise painful sensation, not a vague and undetermined one. as in a hallucinatory dream, you feel that only your head is left, without foundation and support, without a body. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “yet other philosophies and doctrines say almost nothing about death. the only valid attitude is absolute silence or a cry of despair. some people maintain that the fear of death does not have a deeper justification, because as long as there is an i there is no death, and once dead there _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- of others. although i feel that my tragedy is the greatest in history- greater than the fall of empires - i am nevertheless aware of my total insignificance. i am absolutely persuaded that i am nothing in this universe; yet i feel that mine is the only real existence. if i had to choose between the world and me, i would reject the world, its lights and laws, unafraid to glide alone in absolute nothingness. although life for me is torture, i cannot renounce it, because i do not believe in the absolute values in whose name i would sacrifice myself.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- inner temperatures. nobody who does not love chaos is a creator, and whoever is contemptuous of illness must not speak of the spirit.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- innocence is delight in natural charm...there are only two fundamental attitudes: the naive and the heroic...innocence is no longer an option, so there only remains heroism. incapable of fulfillment and happiness... to be a hero - in the most universal sense of the word means to aspire to absolute triumph. but such triumphs come only through death. heroism means transcending life; it is a fatal leap into nothingness, even though the hero may not be aware that his energy springs from a life deprived of its normal supports. all that is innocence, and does not lead to it, belongs to nothingness. can one speak of the seductions of that they are much too mysterious to penetrate. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- of madness with longings for anonymity, screams with silence, aspiration with nothingness how _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- it is silly to condemn the epicureans in the name of eternity. how is suffering rather than pleasure going to make me immortal? from a purely objective point of view, is there any significant difference between one man's agony and another's pleasure? whether you suffer or not, nothingness will swallow you forever. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- magic is useful for small and inessential things, but powerless when confronted with metaphysical reality, which requires, most of the time, silence, something magical sensitivity is incapable of. to live with an acute consciousness of fatality, of one's own impotence in the face of life's great problems, which you cannot even pose without tragically implicating yourself in existence, means to engage directly the capital question of life, that of inaccessible and unknowable infinity. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- your own self? once you have witnessed the fall of the entire world, there is nothing left but for you to fall too. the infinite character of irony cancels all of life's contents. i'm not speaking here of elegant, refined irony, born of a sense of superficial pride and superiority - the irony some use to show off their detachment from the world – but of the tragic, bitter irony of despair. genuine irony replaces tears, convulsions, or even a grotesque and criminal grin.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- To speak of suffering as the path to love means to know nothing of suffering's satanic essence. you don't climb up the steps of suffering; you climb down. they do not lead to heaven but to hell. the darkness at the bottom of the ladder of suffering is less eternal or infinite than the blinding light at the top of the ladder of joy. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- when you must be brave! who knows? you may still be a winner! and if you lose, does it really matter? is there anything to win in this world? all gain is a loss, and all loss is a gain. why always expect a definite stance, clear ideas, meaningful words?” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- why do men insist on achieving something? Would it not be better if they stood still under the sun in calm and silent immobility? what is there to accomplish? why so much effort and ambition? man has forgotten the meaning of silence. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- then you will think it useless to express an opinion, to take a stand, to make an impression; the noises you have renounced increase the anxiety of your soul. after having struggled madly to solve all problems, after having suffered on the heights of despair, in the supreme hour of revelation, you will find that the only answer, the only reality, is silence. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Whoever speaks the language of utopia is more alien to me than a reptile from another geological era. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Plotinus experienced only four moments of ecstasy; Ramana Maharshi, but one. What does the number matter! If anyone is to be pitied, it is the man who has never had even an inkling of such things, and who speaks of them from hearsay. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- I abide by appearances, I note what they are and adhere to them only to the degree that, as a living being, I cannot do otherwise. I act like other people, I perform the same deeds they do, but I identify myself with neither my words nor my actions, I bow to customs and laws, I pretend to share the convictions, i.e., the prejudices, of my fellow citizens, while knowing that in the last analysis I am quite as unreal as they. What then is the skeptic? —A ghost: a conformist ghost. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- All things considered, philosophy is not so contemptible: to hide oneself under more or less objective truths, to disclose oppressions that apparently do not concern us, to cultivate faceless dreads, to camouflage calls for help by the splendors of language . . . Philosophy? An anonymous cry... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- How desist from what we shall never recover, from that pathetic and unheard of nothing which bears our name...we can vanquish it only by means of a sudden whirlwind which, sweeping away the ego, leaves us alone, without anyone, without ourselves... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- No matter how educated you are, if you don't think intensely about death, you are a mere fool. A great scholar – if he is nothing but that – is inferior to an illiterate peasant haunted by final questions. Generally speaking, science has dulled people's minds by diminishing their metaphysical consciousness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Why do almost all madmen speak of God or believe themselves to be one? Having lost the actual contents of their memory, their mind has kept intact the original depths of memory. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Detachment is a negation of both life and death. Whoever has overcome his fear of death has also triumphed over life. For life is nothing but another word for this fear. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- To think without being any the wiser, or rather not to think at all but to remain there and to devour the silence – that is where perspicacity should lead. No pleasure is comparable to that of knowing we don't think. It will be objected, Isn't knowing we don't think still thinking? No doubt, but the wretchedness of thought is surmounted for the time that, instead of leaping from idea to idea, we remain deliberately within just one, one which rejects all the rest and which dissolves itself as soon as it takes for its content its own absence. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Awakening is independent of intellectual capacities: a genius can be a dunce, spiritually speaking. Moreover, knowledge as such gets on no further. An illiterate can possess 'the eye of understanding' and thereby find himself above and beyond any scholar. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ontological Abyss
- “only a few can endure such experiences to the end. there is always a serious danger in repressing something which requires objectification, in locking up explosive energy, because there comes a moment when one can not restrain such overwhelming power. and then the fall is from too much plenitude. there are experiences and obsessions one cannot live with. salvation lies in confessing them. the terrifying experience of death, when preserved in consciousness, becomes _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ruinous. if you talk about death, you save part of yourself. but at the same time, something of your real self dies, because objectified meanings lose the actuality they have in consciousness.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- and inferior phenomenon, the product of spiritual inconsistency, failing to notice that the lyrical resources of subjectivity show remark able freshness and depth. there are people who become lyrical only at crucial moments in their life; some only in the throes of death, when their _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “the experience of suffering is a similar case. you never suspected what lay hidden in yourself and in the world, you were living contentedly at the periphery of things, when suddenly those feelings of suffering which are second only to death itself take hold of you and transport you _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- more? Then we could renounce culture and ambitions; we would lose everything and gain nothing; for what is there to be gained from this world? there are people to whom gain is unimportant, who are hopelessly unhappy and lonely. we are so closed to one another! and yet, were we to be totally open to each other, reading into the depths of our souls, how much of our _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- posturing, unseen by anyone. i despise people who on their death bed master themselves and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “on not wanting to live. there are experiences which one cannot survive, after which one feels that there is no meaning left in anything. once you have reached the limits of life, having _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “the most terrifying intensification bursts into nothingness. you grow inside, you dilate madly until there are no boundaries left, you reach the edge of light, where light is stolen by night, and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- at the edge of life everything is an occasion for death...every experience is in this case a leap into nothingness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- did not all the mystics feel that they could not live after their great ecstasies? what could they expect from this world, those who sense, beyond the normal limits, life, loneliness, despair, death? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- such a person there are only unmotivated motives for living. on the heights of despair, the passion for the absurd is the only thing that can still throw a demonic light on chaos. When all the current reasons- moral, esthetic, religious, social, and so on - no longer guide one's life, how can one sustain life without succumbing to nothingness? Only by a connection with the absurd, by love of absolute uselessness, loving something which does not have substance but which simulates an illusion of life.” (sounds like Tillich's concrete religious symbols) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- i feel that i am dying of solitude, of love, of despair, of hatred, of all that this world offers me. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- i live because the mountains do not laugh and the worms do not sing. the passion for the absurd can grow only in a man who has exhausted everything, yet is still capable of undergoing awesome transfigurations. for one who has lost everything there is nothing left in life except the passion of the absurd. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- will reveal the entire drama of man's finite nature facing the infinite nothingness of the world. solitary walks - extremely fertile and dangerous at the same time, for the inner life - must take place in such a way that nothing will obscure the solitary's meditation on man's isolation _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- world spring from the deepest corner of the spirit, from the place where it has detached itself from life, from the wound of life. to achieve spirituality, one must be very lonely. so much death- _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- I am: therefore the world is meaningless. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- bring every man to the agony of life's last moments by whip, fire, or injections, and through terrible torture he will undergo the great purification afforded by a vision of death. then free him and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- destroy them but to give them a new and different sap, a new heat. the fire i would set to the world would not bring ruin but cosmic transfiguration. in this way life would adjust to higher temperatures and would cease to be an environment propitious to mediocrity. and maybe in this dream, death _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “i call agonic only those dramatic moments in the battle between life and death when the presence of death is experienced consciously and painfully. true agony occurs when you pass into nothingness through death, when a feeling of weariness consumes you irrevocably and death _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- wins. in every true agony there is a triumph of death, even though you may continue to live after those moments of weariness. there is nothing imaginary in this turmoil. every agony bears a conclusive stamp. isn't agony similar to an incurable sickness which torments us intermittently (me- Sickness Unto Death)? agonic moments chart the progress of death in life, revealing a drama in our consciousness caused by the disruption of the balance between life and death. such moments _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- i want to die but I am sorry that I want to die. this is the feeling experienced by those who abandon themselves to nothingness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- how good it would be if one could die by throwing oneself into an infinite void! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- the complexity of the grotesque born out of despair resides in its capacity to indicate an inner infinity and to produce a paroxysm of the highest tension. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- in death one loses everything, by a fall into nothingness. that is why the fear of death is persistent and essential, but actually less strange than the fear of madness, in which our semi-presence creates an anxiety more complex than the organic fear of the total nothingness of death. but wouldn't madness be an escape from the misery of life? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “to step into death does not mean, as commonly believed, especially by christians, to draw one's _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- last breath and to pass into a region qualitatively different from life. it means, rather, to discover in the course of life the way toward death and to find in life's vital signs the immanent abyss of death.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “from a grave perspective, every step in life is a step into death and memory is only the sign _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- of nothingness. the average man, deprived of metaphysical understanding, does not have this consciousness of progressive advance into death, though neither he nor anyone else can escape its inexorable destiny. but when consciousness becomes independent of life, the revelation of death _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- becomes so strong that its presence destroys all naiveté, all joyful enthusiasm, and all natural voluptuousness. to have the consciousness of death is something perverse and extremely corrupt. the naive poetry of life, its seductions and charms, appear empty of content. equally empty are man's finalizing projects and his theological illusions.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- whoever has not experienced the awful agony of death, rising and spreading like a surge of blood, like the choking grasp of a snake which provokes terrifying hallucinations, does not know the demonic character of life and the state of inner effervescence from which great transfigurations arise. such a state of black drunkenness is a necessary prerequisite to understanding why one wishes the immediate end of this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- only those who truly suffer are capable of of genuine content and infinite seriousness...there are many who would gladly give up metaphysical revelations, obtained through despair, agony, and death, in exchange for a naive love or the voluptuous unconsciousness of dance. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “these states, in which separation from the world steadily and painfully increases, bring man closer to his inner reality and cause him to discover death in his own subjectivity. a growing interiority progresses toward the essential center of subjectivity, overcoming all the social forms which usually mask it. once beyond this center, progressive interiority discovers the region _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- where life mingles with death, where man has not yet detached himself from the primary sources of existence, where the demonic rhythm of life works with complete irrationality. in cases of depression, the awareness of death's immanence in life creates an atmosphere of constant dissatisfaction and restlessness that can never be appeased.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- the fear of death, which is nothing but the fear of the nothingness into which death throws us, proves that death presupposes nothingness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- mistaken, because it is impossible to cancel an organic fear by way of abstract constructs. whoever seriously considers the question of death must be afraid. Even those who believe in eternity do so because they are afraid of death. there is in their faith a painful effort to save - even without an absolute certitude- the world of values in which they live and to which they contribute, an effort to defeat the nothingness inherent in the temporal and attain the universal in eternity. Death met without religious faith leaves nothing standing.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “yet other philosophies and doctrines say almost nothing about death. the only valid attitude is absolute silence or a cry of despair. some people maintain that the fear of death does not have a deeper justification, because as long as there is an i there is no death, and once dead there _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- one kind of agony, the one immediately preceding the fall into absolute nothingness. only such moments of agony bring about important existential revelations in consciousness. that is why they expect everything from the end instead of trying to grasp the meaning of a slow revelatory agony. the end will reveal too little, and they will die as ignorant as they have lived.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “isn't nothingness, then, salvation? but how can there be salvation in nothingness? if salvation _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- is nearly impossible through existence, how can it be possible through the complete absence of existence? since there is no salvation either in existence or in nothingness, let this world with its eternal laws be smashed to pieces.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- the sensation of expansion toward nothingness present in melancholy has its roots in a weariness characteristic of all negative states. this weariness separates man from the world. life's intense rhythm, its organic inner pulse, weakens. weariness is the first organic determinant of knowledge. because it creates the necessary conditions for man's differentiation from the world, weariness leads one to the perspective which places the world in front of man. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- the disparity between the world's infinity and man's finitude is a serious cause for despair; but _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- of others. although i feel that my tragedy is the greatest in history- greater than the fall of empires - i am nevertheless aware of my total insignificance. i am absolutely persuaded that i am nothing in this universe; yet i feel that mine is the only real existence. if i had to choose between the world and me, i would reject the world, its lights and laws, unafraid to glide alone in absolute nothingness. although life for me is torture, i cannot renounce it, because i do not believe in the absolute values in whose name i would sacrifice myself.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- i see a form of madness, not of knowledge, in the ecstasy of life's ultimate origins. You cannot experience it except in solitude, when you feel as if you were floating above the world. solitude is the proper milieu for madness. it is noteworthy that even the skeptic can experience this kind of ecstasy. does not the madness of ecstasy reveal itself through this odd combination of certitude and essence with doubt and despair? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “the world in which nothing is solved. to doubt and yet to live - this is a paradox, though not a tragic one, since doubt is less intense, less consuming, than despair. abstract doubt, in which _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- one participates only partially, is more frequent, whereas in despair one participates totally and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- organically. not even the most organic and serious forms of doubt ever reach the intensity of despair. in comparison with despair, skepticism is characterized by a certain amount of dilettantism and superficiality. i can doubt everything, i may very well smile contemptuously at the world, but this will not prevent me from eating, from sleeping peacefully, and from marrying. in despair, whose depth one can fathom only by experiencing it, such actions are possible only with great effort. On the heights of despair, nobody has the right to sleep. thus a genuinely _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- desperate man cannot forget his own tragedy: his consciousness preserves the painful actuality of his subjective torment. doubt is anxiety about problems and things, and has its origins in the unsolvable nature of all big questions. if such questions could be solved, the skeptic would revert to more normal states. The condition of the desperate man in this respect is utterly different: if all _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- problems were solved, he would not be any less anxious, since his anxiety arises out of his own _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- subjective existence. Despair is the state in which anxiety and restlessness are immanent to existence. nobody in despair suffers from problems, but from his own inner torment and fire. it's a pity that nothing can be solved in this world. yet there never was and there never will be anyone who would commit suicide for this reason.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- one must descend all the circles of an inner hell to turn one's destiny into a subjective yet universal problem. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- love. its grandeur and infinity impress me, but my despair is so vast that i don't even harbor the hope of death. how could i love death? one can only write about it in contradictory ways. whoever says that he knows something definite about death shows that he has not even a _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- premonition, although he bears it within himself. every man bears with him not only his life but also his death.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- complex forms of consciousness, anxiety, agony, in a sphere of life where access to eternity would no longer be pure myth?” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “to live in a bath of fire, transfigured by its rich glow – such is the state of immaterial purity where one is nothing but a dancing flame. freed from the laws of gravity, life becomes illusion _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- innocence is delight in natural charm...there are only two fundamental attitudes: the naive and the heroic...innocence is no longer an option, so there only remains heroism. incapable of fulfillment and happiness... to be a hero - in the most universal sense of the word means to aspire to absolute triumph. but such triumphs come only through death. heroism means transcending life; it is a fatal leap into nothingness, even though the hero may not be aware that his energy springs from a life deprived of its normal supports. all that is innocence, and does not lead to it, belongs to nothingness. can one speak of the seductions of that they are much too mysterious to penetrate. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “the feeling of cosmic loneliness, on the other hand, stems not so much from man's subjective agony as from an awareness of the world's isolation, of objective nothingness. it is as if all the _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- let ideals be declared void; beliefs, trifles; art, a lie; and philosophy, a joke. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- and figures entangled in the soul. how could the actor of a complicated drama of the soul in which, all at once, erotic anticipation clashes with metaphysical anxiety, fear of death with desire for innocence, total renunciation with paradoxical heroism despair with pride, forebodings _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- of madness with longings for anonymity, screams with silence, aspiration with nothingness how _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- he who has not experienced absolute fear, universal anxiety, cannot understand struggle, the madness of the flesh and of death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- it is silly to condemn the epicureans in the name of eternity. how is suffering rather than pleasure going to make me immortal? from a purely objective point of view, is there any significant difference between one man's agony and another's pleasure? whether you suffer or not, nothingness will swallow you forever. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- time with its long train of individual moments is, if not unreal, irrelevant...without temporality, life loses its dramatic character...the experience of the eternity is void of life. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “by outstripping history, one acquires superconsciousness, an important ingredient of eternity. it takes you into the realm where contradictions and doubts lose their meaning, where you _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- you pretend that despair and agony are only preliminaries, that ideally one should overcome them if one is not to become an automaton. you think joy is the only means of salvation and you despise all others? You call the obsession with agony selfishness and find generous impulses only in joy? you offer us this joy; but how can we receive it from the outside? as long as it does not spring from our inner resources, help from the outside is quite useless. how easy it is to recommend joy to those who cannot be joyful! do all those who are so eager to promote joy realize what it means to feel and fear madness closing in, to live all your life with the tormenting presentiment of madness, to which is added the even more persistent and certain consciousness of death? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- temptations, the fear of nothingness, and the torments of agony. his life has no tragic dimension, because enthusiasm is the only form of life totally opaque to death. even grace - so similar to enthusiasm- has less of this irrational ignorance of death. grace is full of melancholy charm; not so enthusiasm. my tremendous admiration for enthusiasts stems from my inability to comprehend how there can be such men in a world where death, nothingness, sadness, and despair keep sinister company. It makes one wonder, to see people who are never desperate.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- cannot solve anything, because nothing satisfies him. you will find in him neither the enthusiast's gift of abandon, his naive irrationality, nor the charming paradox of love in its purest state.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- before i have escaped birth, old age, and death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- conceive of it. he who in a moment of despair has not experienced a cold shiver, a sensation of ineluctable abandonment, cosmic death, and individual nothingness, has not experienced the terrifying preliminaries of renunciation.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- life could go on naturally – blindly and irrationally. i hate the wisdom of these men unmoved by truths, who do not suffer with their nerves, their flesh, and their blood. i like only vital, organic truths, the offspring of our anxiety. those whose thoughts are alive are always right; there are no arguments against them. and even if there were, they would not last long. i wonder _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “once you've negated everything and done away completely with all forms of existence, once nothing can survive in the path of your negativity, who can you turn to, laughing or crying, if not _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- your own self? once you have witnessed the fall of the entire world, there is nothing left but for you to fall too. the infinite character of irony cancels all of life's contents. i'm not speaking here of elegant, refined irony, born of a sense of superficial pride and superiority - the irony some use to show off their detachment from the world – but of the tragic, bitter irony of despair. genuine irony replaces tears, convulsions, or even a grotesque and criminal grin.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “...infinity, both in time and space, leads to nothing. how can we accomplish anything in the future when we have behind us an eternity in which nothing was accomplished? if the world had had any meaning, it would have been revealed to us by now and we would know it. how can i continue to believe that it will be disclosed in the future when it has not been made manifest yet? but the world has no meaning; irrational at the core, it is, moreover, infinite. meaning is conceivable only in a finite world, where one can reach something, where there are limits to stop _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- intolerable, terrorizing activity. to awaken the modern world, one must praise laziness. the lazy man has an infinitely keener perception of metaphysical reality than the active one.” (me- non-movement, Saints are Conquerors, Underhill thinks Quietism is misconstrued as 'laziness' when in fact it's an undying participation with the Nothingness) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “sadness, the inebriation and excitement of last moments. is not everything final? what is the anxiety of nothingness if not the perverse joy of our final sadness, our exalted love for the eternity of nothingness and the transience of existence? can it really be that for us existence means exile, and nothingness, home? i must struggle against myself, fly into a rage at my destiny, blow up all _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- resistance to my transfiguration; let there be only my desire for light and darkness! let each one of my actions be either triumph or fall, flight or failure! let life grow and die in me with the speed of a lightning bolt! let not the pettiness and rationality of commonplace existence spoil the pleasures and torments of my inner chaos, the tragic delights of my final despair and joy!” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- To speak of suffering as the path to love means to know nothing of suffering's satanic essence. you don't climb up the steps of suffering; you climb down. they do not lead to heaven but to hell. the darkness at the bottom of the ladder of suffering is less eternal or infinite than the blinding light at the top of the ladder of joy. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ...however painful my agony, however great my isolation, the distance separating me from the world does nothing but render it more accessible. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “nothing matters. everything is possible, and yet nothing is. all is permitted, and yet again, nothing. no matter which way we go, it is no better than any other. it is all the same whether you _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- unreal, normal and absurd, splendid and insipid. there is nothing worth more than anything else, nor any idea better than any other. why grow sad from one's sadness and delight _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- why do men insist on achieving something? Would it not be better if they stood still under the sun in calm and silent immobility? what is there to accomplish? why so much effort and ambition? man has forgotten the meaning of silence. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- then you will think it useless to express an opinion, to take a stand, to make an impression; the noises you have renounced increase the anxiety of your soul. after having struggled madly to solve all problems, after having suffered on the heights of despair, in the supreme hour of revelation, you will find that the only answer, the only reality, is silence. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- time...becomes an ever-growing nothingness, a dilating void, a threat from beyond. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ego-death _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- To escape our fate— what is the good of striving for that? Not that we must despair of finding a substitute ending. Yet it must be a likely one, one that has some chance of being realized. Man being what he is, can we admit that he might be granted the opportunity of subsiding in the peace of decay, amid the benefits of decrepitude? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The abyss is in ourselves and outside of ourselves, it is yesterday’s presentiment, today’s question, tomorrow’s certainty. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- At the climax of our Void, we will be doomed, then, to the indignity of a complete erosion, worse than a sudden catastrophe which would be honorable after all, even glamorous. Let us be confident, let us put our bets on catastrophe, more in accord with our genius and our tastes. Let us take one step further, let us suppose it to be upon us, let us treat it as a fail accompli. According to all appearances, it will include certain survivors, a few lucky ones who will have had the good fortune to contemplate its occurrence and to draw lessons from it. Their first concern will certainly be to abolish the memory of the old humanity, of all the enterprises that have discredited and destroyed it. Turning against the cities, they will seek to complete their ruin, to erase all traces of them. One rachitic tree will be worth more in their eyes than a museum or a temple. No more schools; on the other hand, courses in oblivion and unlearning to celebrate the virtues of inattention and the delights of amnesia. The disgust inspired by the sight of any book, frivolous or serious, will extend to all Knowledge, which will be referred to with embarrassment or dread as if it were an obscenity or a scourge. To bother with philosophy, to elaborate a system, to attach oneself to it and believe in it, will appear as an impiety, a provocation, and a betrayal, a criminal complicity with the past. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- It is doubtless distressing that we must confront the final phase of the historical process at the moment when, having liquidated our old beliefs, we lack any metaphysical assets, any substantial reserves of the Absolute. Surprised by the death agony, dispossessed of everything, we skirt that flattering nightmare experienced by all who had the privilege of finding themselves at the heart of a conspicuous débâcle. If, with the courage to look things in the face, we had that of suspending our course, if only for an instant, this respite, this pause on a global scale, would suffice to reveal to us the nature of the precipice over which we hang, and the resulting dread would quickly be converted into prayers or lamentations, into a salutary convulsion. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- What a pity that “nothingness _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- A Tantric ritual: during the initiation ceremony, you are given a mirror in which you see your own image. Contemplating it, you realize you are nothing but that, i.e., nothing. To what end, so many pretenses, so many airs and graces, when it is so easy to comprehend one’s insignificance? _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The further one advances into age, the more one runs after honors. Perhaps, in fact, vanity is never more active than on the brink of the grave. One clings to trifles in order not to realize what they conceal, one deceives nothingness by something even more null and void. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Life is more and less than boredom, though it is in boredom and by boredom that we discern what life is worth. Once boredom insinuates itself into you, once you fall under its invisible hegemony, everything else seems insignificant. The same might be said of suffering. Yes, indeed. But suffering is localized, whereas boredom evokes an evil without site or support, only that indefinable nothing that erodes you . . . A pure erosion, whose imperceptible effect slowly transforms you into a ruin unnoticed by others and almost unnoticed by yourself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Everything is nothing, including the consciousness of nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Everything I have ventured, everything I have held forth on all my life is indissociable from what I have experienced. I have invented nothing, I have merely been the secretary of my sensations. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We can conceive of eternity only by eliminating all the perishable, all that counts for us. Eternity is absence, being that fills none of the functions of being; it is privation erected into . . . something or other, hence it is nothing or, at most, an estimable fiction. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- X, who instead of looking at things directly has spent his life juggling with concepts and abusing abstract terms, now that he must envisage his own death, is in desperate straits. Fortunately for him, he flings himself, as is his custom, into abstractions, into commonplaces illustrated by jargon. A glamorous hocus-pocus, such is philosophy. But ultimately, everything is hocus-pocus, except for this very assertion that participates in an order of propositions one dares not question because they emanate from an unverifiable certitude, one somehow anterior to the brain’s career. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- It makes no sense to say that death is the goal of life. But what else is there to say? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Boredom, which seems to search out everything to its root, actually searches out nothing, because it descends only into itself and sounds only its own void. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Only the perception of the Void allows us to triumph over death. For if everything lacks reality, why should death be allowed it? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Life is nothing; death, everything. Yet there is nothing which is death, independent of life. It is precisely this absence of autonomous, distinct reality which makes death universal; it has no realm of its own, it is omnipresent, like everything which lacks identity, limit, and bearing; an indecent infinitude. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- When someone complains that his life has come to nothing, we need merely remind him that life itself is an analogous situation, if not worse. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The void allows us to erode the idea of being; but it is not drawn into this erosion itself; it survives an attack which would be self-destructive for any other idea. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The void is nothingness stripped of its negative qualifications, nothingness transfigured. If we should manage to develop a taste for it, our relations with the world are transformed; something in us changes, though we keep our old defects. But we are no longer from here in the same way as before. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- How desist from what we shall never recover, from that pathetic and unheard of nothing which bears our name...we can vanquish it only by means of a sudden whirlwind which, sweeping away the ego, leaves us alone, without anyone, without ourselves... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The void- myself without me- is the liquidation of the adventure of the 'I'- it is being without any trace of being, a blessed engulfment, an incomparable disaster. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- All the same it seems inconceivable for us once we consider the self coldly; it crumbles, it vanishes, it is nothing more than the symbol of a fiction. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- To find that everything lacks reality and not to put an end to it all, this inconsistency is not an inconsistency at all: taken to extremes, the perception of the void coincides with the perception of the whole, with the entrance into the All. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Even if the experience of the void were only a deception, it would still deserve to be tried. What it proposes, what it attempts, is to reduce to nothing both life and death, and this with the sole intention of making them endurable to us. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- All great conversions are born from the sudden revelation of life's meaninglessness. Nothing could be more impressive than this sudden apprehension of the void of existence. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The initial revelation of any monastery: everything is nothing. Thus begin all mysticisms. It is less than one step from nothing to God, for God is the positive expression of nothingness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Without God, everything is nothingness. But God is the supreme nothingness! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- No matter how educated you are, if you don't think intensely about death, you are a mere fool. A great scholar – if he is nothing but that – is inferior to an illiterate peasant haunted by final questions. Generally speaking, science has dulled people's minds by diminishing their metaphysical consciousness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Since nothing has real substance, and life is a twirl in the void, its beginning and its end are meaningless. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- I am sorry sometimes that God no longer fills us with dread. If only we could feel again the primordial quiver of dread in front of the unknown! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Religion is a smile masking cosmic nonsense, one last waft of perfume drifting over nothingness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- When we have devoured the world and remain alone, God appears from behind the screen of Nothingness like a last temptation. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...we no longer know how to prepare ourselves for death. No one cultivates death in himself any longer, it happens over and above him. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ...Bach often meditated on death...Handel compared to Bach, is of this world. Bach is divine... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We are all subject to death at any moment. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Compared to philosophers, saints know nothing. Yet they know everything. Compared to Aristotle, any saint is illiterate. What makes us then believe that we might learn more from the latter? Because all of the philosophers put together are not worth a single saint. Philosophy has no answers. Compared to philosophy, saintliness is an exact science. It gives us precise answers to questions that philosophers do not even dare consider. Its method is suffering and its goal is God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In itself, philosophy, life the rest of culture, is nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A philosopher is saved from mediocrity either through skepticism or mysticism, the two forms of despair in front of knowledge. Mysticism is an escape from knowledge, and skepticism is knowledge without hope. In either instance, the world is not a solution. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Without my solitude I would be nothing but another clown. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When the void of time gives birth to eternity, one burns with religious courage. The emptying of time, whether out of boredom or dread, throws one into a vibrant nothingness, full of vague promises. No saint could find eternity in the world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Nothing can reveal divinity better than the inner multiplication, through memory, of a Bach fugue. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Mysticism revolves around the passion for ecstasy and a horror of the void. One cannot know one without the other...Once it has totally rejected the world, the soul is ripe for a long-term and fecund emptiness…One sees nothing except nothingness. And the latter has become everything. Ecstasy is plenitude in a void, a full void. It is an overwhelming frisson which convulses nothingness, an invasion of being in absolute emptiness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The 'appetite for God'...is first a negation of existence...'appetite for God' can only be a symptom of nihilism. Its intensity proves to what extent one no longer belongs to this earth. One betrays a deficiency of vital instincts whenever one thinks instinctively about God. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- All nihilists have wrestled with God. One more proof of his kinship with nothingness After you have trampled everything under foot, his is the last bastion of nothingness left. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The more you think of God, the less you are. Thus God is nothing more than the projection of our longing for annihilation. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The last step towards nihilism is the disappearance into divinity. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Man is a paradox of nature, equally removed from it and from God...With it (consciousness), God appeared in his true light as one more nothingness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Religion is a smile masking cosmic nonsense, one last waft of perfume drifting over nothingness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ...how do you fill out an empty life? With women, books, or worldly ambitions? No matter what you do, the starting point is boredom, and the end self-destruction. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Any kind of boredom will reveal two things to us: our bodies and the nothingness of the world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- An anxiety born out of nothing suddenly grows in us and confirms our homelessness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Let God pray for the man in whom there is nothing left to die! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Detachment is a negation of both life and death. Whoever has overcome his fear of death has also triumphed over life. For life is nothing but another word for this fear. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Nothing is more exquisite or more disturbing than to have the thought of God occur while one lies in the arms of a whore! It is easy to think of him after a page from the Bible or after an oratorio, but God's presence manifested in the midst of vulgar debauchery has an infinitely greater impact: it brings loneliness and the dread of nothingness back to mind with full force. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- It may very well be that man's sole purpose is none other than to think of God...It is only by thinking of him that God makes one feel uncomfortable. Start prying into him and you are lost...God is an old frumpy coat which you must put on if you have nothing better to wear. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- When nothing is left standing, one experiences exciting power thrills. The ironic mode is a ruse of self-importance: to make up for its nonexistence, the 'I' becomes everything. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Despair and pride grow so closely together that even the keenest observer cannot tell them apart. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The flesh appears as an imposter, a fraud, a disguise which masks nothing. Was this all it was? And if it is worth no more, how does it manage to inspire me with repulsion or with terror? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Now more than ever, we should build monasteries...for those who believe in everything and for those who believe in nothing. Where to escape? There no longer exists a single place where we can professionally execrate this world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “We can discard an illusion, no matter how inveterate; but what to do when we are faced with the consistent, with the durable? If there is only what exists, if being spreads everywhere, how do we break away from it without falling to pieces? The fear there is nothing is followed by the fear that there is something. (Ha!) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Not that this world doesn't exist, but its reality is no such thing. Everything seems to exist and nothing exists. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We must act so that nothing is ours, beginning with desire, that generator of dread. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
## Teleological Paradox
- “only a few can endure such experiences to the end. there is always a serious danger in repressing something which requires objectification, in locking up explosive energy, because there comes a moment when one can not restrain such overwhelming power. and then the fall is from too much plenitude. there are experiences and obsessions one cannot live with. salvation lies in confessing them. the terrifying experience of death, when preserved in consciousness, becomes _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “how distant everything is! i don't understand why we must do things in this world, why we _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- in death one loses everything, by a fall into nothingness. that is why the fear of death is persistent and essential, but actually less strange than the fear of madness, in which our semi-presence creates an anxiety more complex than the organic fear of the total nothingness of death. but wouldn't madness be an escape from the misery of life? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- whoever has not experienced the awful agony of death, rising and spreading like a surge of blood, like the choking grasp of a snake which provokes terrifying hallucinations, does not know the demonic character of life and the state of inner effervescence from which great transfigurations arise. such a state of black drunkenness is a necessary prerequisite to understanding why one wishes the immediate end of this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- one kind of agony, the one immediately preceding the fall into absolute nothingness. only such moments of agony bring about important existential revelations in consciousness. that is why they expect everything from the end instead of trying to grasp the meaning of a slow revelatory agony. the end will reveal too little, and they will die as ignorant as they have lived.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- not everybody loses their innocence: therefore not everybody is unhappy...disintegration implies total loss of innocence, that lovely gift destroyed by knowledge, life's enemy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “spirit in life is an anomaly. i have renounced so much, why should i not renounce spirit as well? but besides being an illness of life, is not renunciation first and foremost an illness of _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “even today nobody can tell what is right or what is wrong...since reality is essentially irrational, why set rules, why distinguish the right from the wrong? morality cannot be saved; it's a mistake to believe otherwise. yet there are those who maintain that in this world pleasure and sin are minor satisfactions which enjoy only a brief triumph and that only good deeds partake of _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- eternity. they pretend that at the end of this world's misery, goodness and virtue will win but they have failed to see that, if eternity obliterates superficial pleasures, it does the same with virtue, good deeds, and moral actions. eternity does not lead to the triumph of either good or evil; it ravages all.” (me- Exactly! Ha! Vivekananda- maya, Tillich- doubt as being an intrinsic part of true faith, Kierkegaard and how the infinite scared him, how St. Therese said that thoughts concerning the Infinite brought on even deeper anguish) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- time with its long train of individual moments is, if not unreal, irrelevant...without temporality, life loses its dramatic character...the experience of the eternity is void of life. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “why should i live in history, or worry about the social and cultural problems of the age? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- let us live the agony fully; let us live our inner tragedy absolutely and frenetically to the very end. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the biblical myth of knowledge as sin is the most profound myth ever invented. the enthusiast's euphoria is due to the fact that he is unaware of the tragedy of knowledge. why not say it? true knowledge is the most tenebrous darkness. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- it is hard to explain how this selection and purification takes place, why these immaterial shadows hold such sway over us. how can we help attributing an absolute character to light and darkness when they are all that is left of the world's ecstasy? the frequency with which ecstasy occurs in oriental religions, as well as in other forms of mysticism at all times, proves the rightness of our hypothesis. the absolute is inside oneself, not outside, and ecstasy, this paroxysm _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- our regression, clear points of reference, where history moves toward a goal envisioned _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- i have always wondered why those who have produced masterpieces in these domains have not all gone mad. music more than any other art requires so much concentration that one could easily, after creative moments, lose one's mind. all great composers ought to either commit suicide or become insane at the height of their creative powers. are not all those aspiring to infinity on the road to madness? normality, abnormality, are notions that no longer mean anything. let us live in the ecstasy of infinity, let us love that which is boundless, let us destroy forms... _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- why not abandon this futile work and begin anew without repeating the same wasteful mistake? is subjective consciousness of eternity not enough? it is the feeling for eternity that the frenetic activity and trepidation of work has destroyed in us. work is the negation of eternity. the more goods we acquire in the temporal realm, the more intense our external work, the less accessible and farther removed is eternity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- unreal, normal and absurd, splendid and insipid. there is nothing worth more than anything else, nor any idea better than any other. why grow sad from one's sadness and delight _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- when you must be brave! who knows? you may still be a winner! and if you lose, does it really matter? is there anything to win in this world? all gain is a loss, and all loss is a gain. why always expect a definite stance, clear ideas, meaningful words?” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- why do men insist on achieving something? Would it not be better if they stood still under the sun in calm and silent immobility? what is there to accomplish? why so much effort and ambition? man has forgotten the meaning of silence. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- A Tantric ritual: during the initiation ceremony, you are given a mirror in which you see your own image. Contemplating it, you realize you are nothing but that, i.e., nothing. To what end, so many pretenses, so many airs and graces, when it is so easy to comprehend one’s insignificance? _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- To die at sixty or at eighty is harder than at ten or at thirty. Habituation to life, there’s the rub. For life is a vice— the greatest one of all. Which explains why we have so much difficulty ridding ourselves of it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It makes no sense to say that death is the goal of life. But what else is there to say? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- After all, why should ordinary people want to contemplate the End, especially when we see the condition of those who do? _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Only the perception of the Void allows us to triumph over death. For if everything lacks reality, why should death be allowed it? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- To find that everything lacks reality and not to put an end to it all, this inconsistency is not an inconsistency at all: taken to extremes, the perception of the void coincides with the perception of the whole, with the entrance into the All. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Since nothing has real substance, and life is a twirl in the void, its beginning and its end are meaningless. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Why do almost all madmen speak of God or believe themselves to be one? Having lost the actual contents of their memory, their mind has kept intact the original depths of memory. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Compared to philosophers, saints know nothing. Yet they know everything. Compared to Aristotle, any saint is illiterate. What makes us then believe that we might learn more from the latter? Because all of the philosophers put together are not worth a single saint. Philosophy has no answers. Compared to philosophy, saintliness is an exact science. It gives us precise answers to questions that philosophers do not even dare consider. Its method is suffering and its goal is God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...how do you fill out an empty life? With women, books, or worldly ambitions? No matter what you do, the starting point is boredom, and the end self-destruction. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The ultimate goal of all religions: life as a diminution of the soul. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It may very well be that man's sole purpose is none other than to think of God...It is only by thinking of him that God makes one feel uncomfortable. Start prying into him and you are lost...God is an old frumpy coat which you must put on if you have nothing better to wear. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...a sort of terminal emotion seizes us. We can talk for hours on end with people we despise, we can say happy and irrelevant things without their noticing how close we are to the Last Judgment, and how lost we are to the world! _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The course of meditation: you begin by ignoring the object and end by ignoring the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- If you don't take an interest in him, you end up interested in mankind. Could you fall any lower than that? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Why then, knowing that in the last resort everything is unreal, still be carried away for such trifles? I am carried away, granted, but I am not involved, which is to say that I take no real interest. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_