# Ernest Becker — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- In this sense everything that man does is religious and heroic, and yet in danger of being fictitious and fallible. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And the crisis of society is, of course, the crisis of organized religion too: religion is no longer valid as a hero system, and so the youth scorn it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- let’s all learn from stupidity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- let’s all learn from repression _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- as the Eastern sages also knew, man is a worm and food for worms. This is the paradox: he is out of nature and hopelessly in it; he is dual, up in the stars and yet housed in a heart-pumping, breath-gasping body that once belonged to a fish and still carries the gill-marks to prove it. His body is a material fleshy casing that is alien to him in many ways—the strangest and most repugnant way being that it aches and bleeds and will decay and die. Man is literally split in two: he has an awareness of his own splendid uniqueness in that he sticks out of nature with a towering majesty, and yet he goes back into the ground a few feet in order blindly and dumbly to rot and disappear forever. It is a terrifying dilemma to be in and to have to live with. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- speculate that a full apprehension of man’s condition would drive him insane are right, quite literally right.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Babies are occasionally born with gills and tails, but this is not publicized—instead it is _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Men are so necessarily mad that not to be mad would amount to another form of madness. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...the coolest repression, the most convincing equanimity, or the warmest self-satisfaction were accomplished lies both toward the world and to oneself. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- up until tomorrow, it would be not in terms of mans animal heredity, his instincts and his evolution: it would be simply in the toll that his pretense of sanity takes, as he tries to deny his true condition.” (Vivekananda- finite/infinite gap, everyone is an idol worshiper and they argue over their idols) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Otto talked about the terror of the world, the feeling of overwhelming awe, wonder, and fear in the face of creation—the miracle of it, the mysterium tremendum et fascinosum of each single _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The great boon of repression is that it makes it possible to live decisively in an overwhelmingly miraculous and incomprehensible world, a world so full of beauty, majesty, and terror that if animals perceived it all they would be paralyzed to act. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- But look at man, the impossible creature!...He not only lives in this moment, but expands his inner self to yesterday, his curiosity to centuries ago, his fears to five billion years from now when the sun will cool, his hopes to an eternity from now. He lives not only on a tiny territory, nor even on an entire planet, but in a galaxy, in a universe, and in dimensions beyond visible universes. It is appalling, the burden that man bears, the experiential burden. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “This is one aspect of the basic human predicament, that we are simultaneously worms _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Life can suck one up, sap his energies, submerge him, take away his self-control, give so much _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- of what energies we really draw on, of the kind of lie we have fashioned in order to live securely and serenely. Augustine was a master analyst of this, as were Kierkegaard, Scheler, and Tillich in _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- courage to be _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is fateful and ironic how the lie we need in order to live dooms us to a life that is never really ours. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- What does it mean “to be born again _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- to the terrifying paradox of the human condition, since one must be born not as a god, but as a _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is simply this: what sense does it make to talk about “enjoying ones full humanness _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- full humanness _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- enjoying _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- useless passion _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- This is a serious game, the defense of one’s existence^how take it away from people and leave them joyous? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Rank understood that in the face of the overwhelmingness of the world the child could not out of himself muster the stamina and the authority necessary to live in full expansiveness with limitless horizons of perception an experience. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- crazy _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- What exactly would it mean on this earth to be wholly unrepressed, to live in full bodily and psychic expansiveness? It can only mean to be reborn into madness. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- For now, it is enough to invoke Marcia Lee Anderson’s complete scientific formula: “Stripped of subtle complications i.e., of all the character defenses—repression, denial, misperception of reality, who could regard the sun except with fear? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the best existential analysis of the human condition leads directly into the problems of God and faith... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For Kierkegaard “philistinism _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “The depressed person is so afraid of being himself, so fearful of exerting his own individuality, of insisting on what might be his own meanings, his own conditions for living, that he _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the torture of depressive psychosis: to remain steeped in one's failure and yet to justify it, to continue to draw a sense of worthwhileness out of it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...philistinism is what we would call “normal neurosis. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- tranquilizing itself with the trivial. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is the type of man who has great contempt for “immediacy, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- introvert. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- But usually life sucks us up into standardized activities...And instead of working our inner secret we gradually cover it over and forget it, while we become purely external men, playing successfully the standardized hero-game into which we happen to fall by accident, by family connection, by reflex patriotism, or by the simple need to eat and the urge to procreate. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I am not saying that Kierkegaard's “introvert _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And so he lives in a kind of “incognito, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- little difference, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To be a “normal cultural man _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In order to transcend himself he must break down that which he needs in order to live. Like Lear he must throw off all his “cultural lendings _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In the prison of one’s character one can pretend and feel that he is somebody, that the world is manageable, that there is a reason for one’s life, a ready justification for one’s action. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- No mistake about it: the curriculum in the “school _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- taste _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the direction is quite normal...the self must be broken in order to become a self. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- all finite aims, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- man who is educated by possibility is educated in accordance with his infinity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- What, after all, is more “mysterious _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- If you don’t have a God in heaven, an invisible dimension that justifies the visible one, then you take what is nearest at hand and work out your problems on that. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- He brought sexual taboos into being because he needed to triumph over the body, and he sacrificed the pleasures of the body to the highest pleasure of all: self-perpetuation as a spiritual being through all eternity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- solution to the human dilemma. The partner represents a kind of fulfillment in freedom from self-consciousness and guilt; but at the same time he represents the negation of one’s distinctive personality.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is impossible to get blood from a stone, to get spirituality from a physical being, and so one feels “Inferior _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...people need a “beyond, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- solid _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “We should not be surprised that Rank was brought to exactly the same conclusion as Kierkegaard: that the only way out of human conflict is full renunciation, to give one’s life as a gift to the highest powers. Absolution has to come from the absolute beyond. As Kierkegaard, Rank showed that this rule applied to the strongest, most heroic types—not to trembling and _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- strongest personality type, the one with the largest ego. The great scientific world-shaker Newton was the same man who always carried the Bible under his arm.” (this is a lot) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Rank said: “...he himself could so easily confess his agnosticism while he had created for himself a private religion. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Here Rank joins Kierkegaard in the belief that one should not stop and circumscribe his life with beyonds that are near at hand, or a bit further out, or created by oneself. One should reach for the highest beyond of religion: man-should cultivate the passivity of renunciation to the highest powers no matter how difficult it is. Anything less is less than full development, even if it seems weakness and compromise to the best thinkers. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Man is a “theological being, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- At this point the “tough-minded _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We cannot repeat too often the great lesson of Freudian 'psychology: that repression is normal self-protection and creative self-restriction—in a real sense, mans natural substitute for instinct. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Philistines. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- tranquilize themselves with the trivial _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We can say that the essence of normality is the refusal of reality. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- This is neurosis in a nutshell: the miscarriage of clumsy lies about reality. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- normal _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- You work out your need for perfection (bigness, invulnerability) in the symptom—say, hand-washing or the avoidance of sex in marriage. We might say that the symptom itself represents the locus of the performance of heroism. No wonder that one cannot jjive it uj): that would release all by itself the whole flood of terror that one is trying to deny and overcome. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- There is a type of person who has difficulty fetishizing and narrowing-down; he has a vivid imagination, takes in too much experience, too large a chunk of the world —and this too must be called neurotic...We saw that these people feel their isolation, their individuality. They stick out, are less built-into normal society, less securely programmed for automatic cultural action. To have difficulty partializing experience is to have difficulty living. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We might say that both the artist and the neurotic bite off more than they can chew, but the artist spews it back out again and chews it over in an objectified way, as an external, active, work project. The neurotic can’t marshal this creative response embodied in a specific work, and so he chokes on his introversions. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The neurotic exhausts himself not only in self-preoccupations like hypochondriacal fears and all sorts of fantasies, but also in others: those around him on whom he is dependent become his therapeutic work project; he takes out his subjective problems on them. But people are not clay to be molded; they have needs and counter-wills of their own. The neurotic’s frustration as a failed artist can’t be remedied by anything but an objective creative work of his own. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Either you eat up yourself and others around you, trying for perfection; or you objectify that imperfection in a work, on which you then unleash your creative powers. In this sense, some kind of objective creativity is the only answer man has to the problem of life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- He takes in the world, makes a total problem out of it, and then gives out a fashioned, human answer to that problem. This, as Goethe saw in Faust, is the highest that man can achieve. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- its objective perfection. He is caught in a vicious circle because he experiences the unreality of fantasied self-glorification. There is really no conviction possible for man unless it comes from others or from outside himself in some way—at least not for long. One simply cannot justify his own heroism in his own inner symbolic fantasy, which is what leads the neurotic to feel more unworthy and inferior.” (this is a lot) _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- right _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “But it is very risky to try to be hard and fast about types of personality; there are all kinds of blends and combinations that defy precise compartmentalization. After all, one of the reasons we narrow down too much is that we must sense on some level of awareness that life is too big _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- just about right, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- normal, average men _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Some people are more sensitive to the lie of cultural life, to the illusions of the _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- causa-sui project that others are so thoughtlessly and trustingly caught up in. The neurotic is having trouble with the balance of cultural illusion and natural reality; the possible horrible _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The caricature aspect of life appears whenever the drunkenness of illusion wears off. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- second _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We must remind ourselves that when we talk about the need for illusion we are not being cynical. True, there is a great deal of falseness and self-deception in the cultural causa-sui project, but there is also the necessity of this project. Man needs a “second _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Illusion _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- deculturation _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It begins to look as though modern man cannot find his heroism in everyday life any more, as men did in traditional societies just by doing their daily duty of raising children, working, and worshipping. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- That is the price modern man pays for the eclipse of the sacred dimension. When he dethroned the ideas of soul and God he was thrown back hopelessly on his own resources, on himself and those few around him. Ever! lovers and families trap and disillusion us because they are not substitutes for absolute transcendence. We might say that they are poor illusions in the sense that we have been discussing. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- soul _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- self _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- soul _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- that the universal and general cause for personal badness, guilt, and inferiority is the natural world and the persons relationship to it as a symbolic animal who must find a secure place in it. All the _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- when it offers itself as a full explanation of human unhappiness, that it becomes a fraud that makes the situation of modern man an impasse from which he cannot escape. Or, put another way, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Modern man needs a “thou _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- By now it should be clear that this blurring of Rank and Kierkegaard is not a weak surrender to ideology but an actual scientific working-through of the problem of human character. Both men reached the same conclusion after the most exhaustive psychological quest: that at the very furthest reaches of scientific description, psychology has to give way to “theology _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- this entire chapter is important, due to sections like this- _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- shared illusions. The result is that the sinner (neurotic) is hyperconscious of the very thing he tries to deny: his creatureliness, his miserableness and unworthiness.41 The neurotic is thrown back on _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- I am everything _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- All reflection and no plunging drives us man; all plunging and no reflection, and we are brutes. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is one thing to imagine this “cure, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- prescribe _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A second reason for the hollowness of our prescription for neurosis follows. If there are no ready-made traditional world-views into which to fit oneself with dependency and trust, religion becomes a very personal matter—so personal that faith itself seems neurotic, like a private fantasy and an action taken out of weakness. The one thing modern man cannot do is what Kierkegaard prescribed: the lonely leap into faith, the naive personal trust in some kind of transcendental support for ones life. This support is now independent of living external rituals and customs: the church and the community do not exist, or do not carry much conviction. This situation is what helps make faith fantastic. In order for something to seem true to man, it has to be visibly supported in some way— lived, external, compelling. Men need pageants, crowds, panoplies, special days marked off on calendars—an objective focus for obsession, something to give form and body to internal fantasy, something external to yield oneself to. Otherwise the neurotic is brought back to the point of his departure: how is he to believe in his lonely, inner sense of specialness? _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The characteristic of the modem mind is the banishment of mystery, of naive belief, of simple-minded hope. We put the accent on the visible, the clear, the cause-and-effect relation, the logical—always the logical.” (I can't remember, but someone said the modern man has been stripped of his metaphysical thinking, still can't remember, Ha!) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We said earlier that the question of human life is: on what level of illusion does one live? This question poses an absolutely new question for the science of mental health, namely: What is the ‘‘best _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- best. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- best _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- cosmos where they belong. It also takes the problem of self-justification and removes it from the objects near at hand. We no longer have to please those around us, but the very source of creation— the powers that created us, not those into whose lives we accidentally fell. Our life ceases to be a reflexive dialogue with the standards of our wives, husbands, friends, and leaders and becomes _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Adler should have stressed more the sheer terror of individuation of difference, of being alone, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- life-lie _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When the average person can no longer convincingly perform his safe heroics or cannot hide his failure to be his own hero, then he bogs down in the failure of depression and its terrible guilt. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The depressed person exaggerates his guilt because it unblocks his dilemma in the safest and easiest way. He also, as Adler pointed out, gets the people around him to respond to him, to pity him, and to value him and take care of him. He controls them and heightens his own personality by his very self-pity and self-hatred. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- realist _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- But if the neurotic is the “artiste manque, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “The schizophrenic is not programmed neurally into automatic response to social meanings, but he cannot marshal an ego response, a directive control of his experiences. His own erupting meanings cannot be given any creative form. We might say that because of his exaggerated helplessness he uses his symbolic inner experiences alone as an experiential anchor, as something to lean on. He exists reflexively toward them, comes to be controlled by them instead of reshaping and using them. The genius too is not programmed in automatic cultural meanings; but he has _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- the resources of a strong ego, or at least a sufficient one, to give his own personal meanings a creative form.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The religious geniuses of history have argued that to be really submissive means to be submissive to the highest power, the true infinity and absolute—and not to any human substitutes, lovers, leaders, nationstates. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- He could not yield emotionally to superordinate power or conceptually to the transcendental dimension. He lived still wholly in the dimension of the visible world and was limited by what was possible in that dimension only; therefore, all his meanings had to come from that dimension. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Put in these abstract terms the ideal of the knight of faith is surely one of the most beautiful and challenging ideals ever put forth by man. It is contained in most religions in one form or another although no one, I think, has described it at length with such talent at Kierkegaard. Like all ideals it is a creative illusion, meant to lead men on, and leading men on is not the easiest tiling. As Kierkegaard said, faith is the hardest thing; he placed himself between belief and faith, unable to make the jump. The jump doesn't depend on man after all—-there's the rub: faith is a matter of grace. As Tillich later put it: religion is first an open hand to receive gifts (grace) and then a closed hand to give them. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Because you wanted to _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Because you felt like it _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- James, again, knew how difficult it was to live astride both worlds, the visible and the invisible. One tended to pull you away from the other. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- As in any religion, the adept “swears by _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- true _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “It is no wonder that when therapies strip man down to his naked aloneness, to the real nature of experience and the problem of life, they slip into some kind of metaphysic of power and justification _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- least the support of a guru who will vouch for these things in his own overpowering and harmonious-appearing person. Man must reach out for support to a dream, a metaphysic of hope that sustains him and makes his life worthwhile.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- no way to transcend the limits of the human condition or to change the psychological structural conditions that make humanity possible. What can it mean for something new to emerge from such an animal and to triumph over his nature? Even though men have repeated such a notion since the most ancient times and in the most subtle and weightiest ways, even though whole movements of social action as well as thought have been inspired by such ideas, still they are mere fancy...” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Consider Paul Tillich: he too had his metaphysic of New Being, the belief in the emergence of a new type of person who would be more in harmony with nature, less driven, more perceptive, more in touch with his own creative energies, and who might go on to form genuine communities to replace the collectivities of our time, communities of truer persons in place of the objective creatures created by our materialistic culture. But Tillich had fewer illusions about this New Being than most of the psychotherapeutic religionists. He saw that the idea was actually a myth, an ideal that might be worked toward and so partly realized. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- If you are going to have a myth of New Being, then, like Tillich, you have to use this myth as a call to the highest and most difficult effort—and not to simple joy. A creative myth is not simply a relapse into comfortable illusion; it has to be as bold as possible in order to be truly generative. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- What singles out Tillich’s cogitations about the New Being is that there is no nonsense here. Tillich means that man has to have the “courage to be _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Again, we are talking about the highest ideal things, which always seem most unreal—but how can we settle for less? We need the boldest creative myths, not only to urge men on but also and _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As Tillich warned us, New Being, under the conditions and limitations of existence, will only bring into play new and sharper paradoxes, new tensions, and more painful disharmonies—a “more intense demonism. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Epistemological Rupture
- What we will see is that man cuts out for himself a manageable world: he throws himself into action uncritically, unthinkingly. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “The knowledge of death is reflective and conceptual, and animals are spared it. They live and they disappear with the same thoughtlessness: a few minutes of fear, a few seconds of anguish, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Mans body is a problem to him that has to be explained. Not only his body is strange, but also its inner landscape, the memories and dreams. Mans very insides—his self—are foreign to him. He doesn't know who he is, why he was born, what he is doing on the planet, what he is supposed to do, what he can expect. His own existence is incomprehensible to him, a miracle just like the rest of creation, closer to him, right near his pounding heart, but for that reason all the more strange. Each thing is a problem, and man can shut out nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “the power of an all-absorbing activity, a passion, a dedication to a game, a way of life, that like a comfortable web keeps a person buoyed up and ignorant of himself, of the fact that he does not rest on his own center. All of us are driven to be supported in a self-forgetful way, ignorant _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The defenses that form a persons character support a grand illusion, and when we grasp this we can understand the full drivenness of man. He is driven away from himself, from self-knowledge, self-reflection. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...we could understand something the poets and religious geniuses have long known: that the armor of character was so vital to us that to shed it meant to risk death and madness. It is not hard to reason out: If character is a neurotic defense against despair and you shed that defense, you admit the full flood of despair, the full realization of the true human condition, what men are really afraid of, what they struggle against, and are driven toward and away from. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- tour-de-force that allows him to ignore incongruities, to nourish himself on impossibilities, to thrive on blindness. He accomplishes thereby a peculiarly human victory: the ability to be smug about _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It can’t be overstressed, one final time, that to see the world as it really is is devastating and terrifying...It makes thoughtless living in the world of men an impossibility. It places a trembling animal at the mercy of the entire cosmos and the problem of the meaning of it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “We see again confirmed the point of view that a persons character is a defense against despair, an attempt to avoid insanity because of the real nature of the world. Searles looks at schizophrenia precisely as the result of the inability to shut out terror, as a desperate style of living with terror. Frankly I don’t know anything more cogent that needs to be said about this syndrome: it is a _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “...the final terror of self-consciousness is the knowledge of one’s own death, which is the peculiar sentence on man alone in the animal kingdom. This is the meaning of the Garden of Eden myth and the rediscovery of modem psychology: that death is man s peculiar and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- seems literally stupid. He cannot seem to understand the situation he is in, cannot see beyond his own fears, cannot grasp why he has bogged down.” (how does this relate to me? Is this too egotistical a question?) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- This is precisely the condition of depression, that one can hardly breathe or move. One of the unconscious tactics that the depressed person resorts to, to try to make sense out of his situation, is to see himself as immensely worthless and guilty. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the depressed person avoids the possibility of independence and more life precisely because these are what threaten him with destruction and death. He holds on to the people who have enslaved him in a network of crushing obligations, belittling interaction, precisely because these people are his shelter, his strength, his protection against the world. Like most everyone else the depressed person will not stand alone on his own center, who cannot draw from within himself the necessary strength to face up to life. So he embeds himself in others; he is sheltered by the necessary and willingly accepts it. But now his tragedy is plain to see: his necessity has become trivial, and so his slavish, dependent, depersonalized life has lost its meaning. It is frightening to be in such a bind. One chooses slavery because it is safe and meaningful; then one loses the meaning of it. but fears to move out of it. One has literally died to life but must remain physically in this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Kierkegaard's torment was the direct result of seeing the world as it really is in relation to his situation as a creature. The prison of one’s character is painstakingly built; to deny one thing and one thing alone: one’s creatureliness. The creatureliness is the terror. Once admit that you are a defecating creature and you invite the primeval ocean of creature anxiety to flood over you. But it is more than creature anxiety, it is also man’s anxiety, the anxiety that results from the human paradox that man is an animal who is conscious of his animal limitation. Anxiety is the result of the perception of the truth of one’s condition. What does it mean to be a self-conscious animal? The idea is ludicrous, if it is not monstrous. It means to know that one is food for worms. This is the terror: to have emerged from nothing, to have a name, consciousness of self, deep inner feelings, an excruciating inner yearning for life and self-expression—and with all this yet to die. It seems like a hoax, which is why one type of cultural man rebels openly against the idea of God. What kind of deity would create such complex and fancy worm food? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We can understand why anxiety “is the possibility of freedom, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Despite all his leanings toward the idea of death, the hopeless situation of the child, the real terror of the external world, and the like, Freud did not need to give them a central place in his thought. He did not need to rework his vision of man from that of primarily a pleasure-seeker of sex to that of the terrified, death-avoiding animal. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- We saw that the child stands right at the crossroads of the human dualism. He discovers that he has a fallible body, and he is learning that there is a whole cultural world-view that will permit him to triumph over it. The questions about sex that the child asks are thus not— at a fundamental level—about sex at all. They are about the meaning of the body, the terror of living with a body. When the parents give a straightforward biological answer to sexual questions, they do not answer the child’s question at all. He wants to know why he has a body, where it came from, and what it means for a self-conscious creature to be limited by it. He is asking about the ultimate mystery of life, not about the mechanics of sex. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We feel diminished by their human shortcomings. Our interiors feel empty or anguished, our lives valueless, when we see the inevitable pettinesses of the world expressed through the human beings in it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We know that he was a genius, and we can now see the real problem that genius has: how to develop a creative work with the full force of one’s passion, a work that saves one’s soul, and at the same time to renounce that very work because it cannot by itself give salvation. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- What a shame that Freuds closest collaborator should turn so soft in the head, should deliver over to the easy consolations of religion the hard-won knowledge of psychoanalysis. So he would think—and he would be wrong. Rank made complete closure of psychoanalysis., on Kierkegaard but he did not do it out of weakness or wishfulness. He did it out of the logic of the historical-pychoanlytic understanding of man. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Neurosis has three interdependent aspects. In the first place it refers to people who are having trouble living with the truth of existence; it is universal in this sense because everyone has some trouble living with the truth of life and pays some vital ransom to that truth. In the second place, neurosis is private because each person fashions his own peculiar stylistic reaction to life. Finally, beyond both of these is perhaps the unique gift of Rank’s work: that neurosis is also historical to a large extent, because all the traditional ideologies that disguised and absorbed it have _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When we say neurosis represents the truth of life we again mean that life is an overwhelming problem for an animal free of instinct. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- “Gods can take in the whole of creation because they alone can make sense of it, know what it is all about and for. But as soon as a man lifts his nose from the ground and starts sniffing at eternal problems like life and death, the meaning of a rose or a star cluster—then he is in trouble. Most men spare themselves this trouble by keeping their minds on the small problems of their lives _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “It is one thing to ritually wash one’s hands three times; it is another to wash them until the hands bleed and one is in the bathroom most of the day. Here we see in pure culture, as it were, what is at stake in all human repression: the fear of life and death. Safety in the face of the real _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- We immediately recognize this as the same creative dynamic that the person uses in transference, when he fuses all the terror and majesty of creation in the transference-object. This is what Rank meant when he said that neurosis represents creative power gone astray and confused. The person doesn’t really know what the problem is, but he. hits on an ingenious way to keep moving past it. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- There is no doubt that creative work is itself done under a compulsion often indistinguishable from a purely clinical obsession. In this sense, what we call a creative gift is merely the social license to be obsessed. And what we call “cultural routine _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We have seen that what we call the human character is actually a lie about the nature of reality. The causa-sui project is a pretense that one is invulnerable because protected by the power of others and of culture, that one is important in nature and can do something about the world. But in back of the causa-sui project whispers the voice of possible truth: that human life may not be more than a meaningless interlude in a vicious drama of flesh and bones that we call evolution; that the Creator may not care any more for the destiny of man or the self-perpetuation of individual men than He seems to have cared for the dinosaurs or the Tasmanians. The whisper is the same one that slips incongruously out of the Bible in the voice of Ecclesiastes: that all is vanity, vanity of vanities. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- truth about himself and the world is seeping into his consciousness. The average man is at least secure that the cultural game is the truth, the unshakable, durable truth. He can earn his immortality in and under the dominant immortality ideology, period.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- He) perceives himself as unreal and reality as unbearable, because with him the mechanisms of illusion are known and destroyed by self consciousness. He can no longer deceive himself about himself and disillusions even his own ideal of personality. He perceives himself as bad, guilt laden, inferior, as a small, weak, helpless creature, which is the truth about mankind, as Oedipus also discovered in the crash of his heroic fate. All other is illusion, deception, but necessary deception in order to be able to bear one’s self and thereby life. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- quoting Otto Rank- “With the truth, one cannot live. To be able to live one needs illusions, _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- This is why I never wanted to see a psychologist- “Psychology narrows the cause for personal unhappiness down to the person himself, and then he is stuck with himself. But we know _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the larger sense, a problem of the eclipse of secure communal ideologies of redemption.” (the nightmare of existence does not get solved, Zapffe- 'sure you may be in a 'better' psychological state than me, but I am the better philosopher. Man's Search for Meaning sucks, since it denies the truth of the nightmare of existence and attempts to put forth a knowingly subjective, worthless illusion as 'truth' or 'worth living for') _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- But we know that this attempt is doomed to failure because man simply cannot justify his own heroism; he cannot fit himself into his own cosmic plan and make it believable. He must live with agonizing doubts if he remains in touch at all with the larger reality. Only when he loses this touch do the doubts vanish—and that is the definition of psychosis: a wholly unreal belief- in the self-justification of cosmic heroism. 'I am Christ.' _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “But now we see the historical difference between the classical sinner and the modem neurotic: both of them experience the naturalness of human insufficiency, only today the neurotic is stripped _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- What typifies the neurotic is that he “knows _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “It was G. K. Chesterton who kept alive the spirit of Kierkegaard and naive Christianity in modern thought, as when he showed with such style that the characteristics the modern mind prides itself on are precisely those of madness. There is no one more logical than the lunatic, more concerned with the minutiae of cause and effect. Madmen are the greatest reasoners we know, and that trait is one of the accompaniments of their undoing. All their vital processes are _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Finally, religion alone gives hope, because it holds open the dimension of the unknown and the unknowable, the fantastic mystery of creation that the human mind cannot even begin to approach, the possibility of a multidimensionality of spheres of existence, of heavens and possible embodiments that make a mockery of earthly logic—and in doing so, it relieves the absurdity of earthly life, all the impossible limitations and frustrations of living matter. In religious terms, to “see God _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “Adler very early showed how the schizophrenic was crippled by the fear of life and its demands, by a low self-evaluation in the face of them. He mistrusts not only himself but also the knowledge _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I mean the fact that human experience is split into two modes—the symbolic self and the physical body—and that these two modes of experience can be quite distinct. In some people they are so distinct as to be unintegrated, and these are the people we call schizophrenic. The hypersensitive individual reacts to his body as something strange to himself, something utterly untrustworthy, something not under his secure control. Right away we can see that the schizophrenic is burdened, like all of us, with an “alien _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- hospitals attest. An impoverished and powerless person—even when he is a perceiver of truth—has no gift to offer to his fellows or to himself. The uncreative psychotic is simply totally crippled by life-and-death fears.” (I always wanted to be more creative. This would make the earthly world easier; and who says that an 'easier' existence is to be pursued? To avoid pain and fear? Ha! Weak and pathetic us human creatures are! Avoid because I don't like feeling a particular way. Just an arbitrary sensation? Naturalism) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- In schizophrenia, like depression, we see the problem of heroics in its stark nudity. How does one become a hero from a position in which he has hardly any resources at all?—a position from which he sees more clearly than anyone else the menacing dangers of life and death and yet has no solid feeling of inner glory to oppose to them? He has to fabricate such a feeling in the best way he can, which will be a clumsy, crippled, and inverted way. No wonder that psychotic transferences are so total, so intense, so all-absorbing, so frightening (when they are not pathetic). _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “All perversions, then, can truly be seen as 'private religions,' as attempts to heroically transcend the human condition and to achieve some kind of satisfaction in that condition. That is why perverts are forever saying how superior and life-enhancing their particular approach is, how they cannot understand why anyone would not prefer it. It is the same sentiment that animates all true believers, the trumpeting of who is the true hero and what is the only genuine _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- path to eternal glory.” (I agree. Tillich on the importance and necessity of doubt in faith, on the importance of not idolizing the 'concrete' symbols of faith) _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- From this point of view the problem of mental illness is one of not knowing what kind of heroics one is practising or not being able—once one does know—to broaden ones heroics from their crippling narrowness. Paradoxical as it may sound, mental illness is thus a matter of weakness and stupidity. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- All living organisms are condemned to perversity, to the narrowness of being mere fragments of a larger totality that overwhelms them, which they cannot understand or truly cope with—yet must still live and struggle in. We still must ask, then, in the spirit of the wise old Epictetus, what kind of perversity is fitting for man. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And then the real tragedy, as Andre Malraux wrote in The Human Condition: that it takes sixty years of incredible suffering and effort to make such an individual and then he is good only for dying. This painful paradox is not lost on the person himself least of all himself. He feels agonizingly unique, and yet he knows that this doesn’t make any difference as far as ultimates are concerned. He has to go the way of the grasshopper, even though it takes longer. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Finally, with these questions we saw that we could call into doubt the pretensions of the whole therapeutic enterprise. What joy and comfort can it give to fully awakened people? Once you _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- accept the truly desperate situation that man is in, you come to see not only that neurosis is normal, but that even psychotic failure represents only a little additional push in the routine stumbling _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- along life’s way. If repression makes an untenable life liveable, self-knowledge can entirely destroy it for some people.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “To talk about hope is to give the right focus to the problem. It helps us understand why even the thinkers of great stature who got at the heart of human problems could not rest content with the view of the tragical nature of man’s lot that this knowledge gives,. It is today well known how _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- perhaps especially to help men see the reality of their condition. We have to be as hard-headed as possible about reality and possibility.” (Tillich's symbolism, Vivekananda's praise of having many sects of religion, etc.) _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- this planet has to be done in the lived truth of the terror of creation, of the grotesque, of the rumble of panic underneath everything. Otherwise it is false.” (Tillich, which is why 'mysticism' is not the 'stopping point', it is a guide, but it does not overpower the experience of Meaninglessness, Nihilism) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
## Ethical Collapse
- “We disguise our struggle by piling up figures in a bank book to reflect privately our sense of heroic worth. Or by having only a little better home in the neighborhood, a bigger car, brighter children. But underneath throbs the ache of cosmic specialness, no matter how we mask it in _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- It can’t be overstressed, one final time, that to see the world as it really is is devastating and terrifying...It makes thoughtless living in the world of men an impossibility. It places a trembling animal at the mercy of the entire cosmos and the problem of the meaning of it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- When^you narrow your meanings down to this world, you are still looking for the absolute, for the supreme self-transcending power, mystery, and majesty. Only now you must find it in the things of this world.” (Tillich, Vivekananda, Ha- good luck) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The great lesson of Rank’s depreciation of sexuality was not that he played down physical love and sensuality, but that he saw—like Augustine and Kierkegaard, that man cannot fashion an absolute from within his condition, that cosmic heroism must transcend human relationships. What is at stake in all this is. of course, the question of freedom, the quality of one’s life and one's individuality. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- good provider _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Do Freud and others imagine that surrender to God is masochistic, that to empty oneself is demeaning? Well, answers Rank, it represents on the contrary the furthest reach of the self, the highest idealization man can achieve. It represents the fulfillment of the Agape love-expansion, the achievement of the truly creative type. Only in this way, says Rank, only by surrendering to the bigness of nature on the highest, least-fetishized level, can man conquer death. In other words, the true heroic validation of one’s life lies beyond sex, beyond the other, beyond the private religion—all these are makeshifts that pull man down or that hem him in, leaving him torn with ambiguity. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Neurosis is, then, something we all share; it is universal. Or, putting it another way, nonfiaTi^is neurosis, and vice versa. We call a man “neurotic _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- not only outer illusions such as art, religion, philosophy, science and love afford, but inner illusions which first condition the outer.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- special wondrousness they felt as good as dead. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We can conclude with Rank that religion is “just as good a psychology _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Here Rank and Kierkegaard meet in one of those astonishing historical mergers of thought: that sin and neurosis are two ways of talking about the same thing—the complete isolation of the individual, his disharmony with the rest of nature, his hyperindividualism, his attempt to create his own world from within himself. Both sin and neurosis represent the individual blowing himself up to larger than his true size, his refusal to recognize his cosmic dependence. Neurosis, like sin, is an attempt to force nature, to pretend that the causa-sui project really suffices. In sin and neurosis man fetishizes himself on something narrow at hand and pretends that the whole meaning and miraculousness of creation is limited to that, that he can get his beatification. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- of the symbolic world-view, the God-ideology that would make sense out of his unworthiness and would translate it into heroism. Traditional religion turned the consciousness of sin into a condition _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- This is Rank’s devastating Kierkegaardian conclusion: if neurosis is sin, and not disease, then the only thing which can “cure _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Boss says that the terrible guilt feelings of the depressed person are existential, that is, they represent the failure to live one’s own life, to fulfill one’s own potential because of the twisting and turning to be “good _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “When we are young we are often puzzled by the fact that each person we admire seems to have a different version of what life ought to be, what a good man is, how to live, and so on. If we are _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- especially sensitive it seems more than puzzling, it is disheartening.” (this is the absurd perspective, the problem of relativism/nihilism that is not seen by every one because they have been raised within the relativistic/nihilistic framework, nothing weird about everyone having a different opinion/not being able to find out who's right, if anyone is, and yet not figuring out that all your moral/important demands and judgments are just as nonsensical as the person that you oppose, since there is no way to find out who is right, how come everyone doesn't find this weird?) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- I have found little that is "good _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And then the real tragedy, as Andre Malraux wrote in The Human Condition: that it takes sixty years of incredible suffering and effort to make such an individual and then he is good only for dying. This painful paradox is not lost on the person himself least of all himself. He feels agonizingly unique, and yet he knows that this doesn’t make any difference as far as ultimates are concerned. He has to go the way of the grasshopper, even though it takes longer. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Oedipus complex, as Freud so well knew, or because one can make love with tenderness, as so many now believe. Forget it. In this sense again it is Freuds somber pessimism, especially of his later writings such as Civilization and Its Discontents, that keeps him so contemporary. Men are doomed to live in an overwhelmingly tragic and demonic world.” (Zapffe and 'Happiness is for the pigs') _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Linguistic Futility
- “Neurosis is another word for describing a complicated technique for avoiding misery, but reality _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man emerged from the instinctive thoughtless action of the lower animals and came to reflect on his condition. He was given a consciousness of his individuality and his part-divinity in creation, the beauty and uniqueness of his face and his name. At the same time he was given the consciousness of the terror of the world and of his own death and decay. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Kierkegaard's torment was the direct result of seeing the world as it really is in relation to his situation as a creature. The prison of one’s character is painstakingly built; to deny one thing and one thing alone: one’s creatureliness. The creatureliness is the terror. Once admit that you are a defecating creature and you invite the primeval ocean of creature anxiety to flood over you. But it is more than creature anxiety, it is also man’s anxiety, the anxiety that results from the human paradox that man is an animal who is conscious of his animal limitation. Anxiety is the result of the perception of the truth of one’s condition. What does it mean to be a self-conscious animal? The idea is ludicrous, if it is not monstrous. It means to know that one is food for worms. This is the terror: to have emerged from nothing, to have a name, consciousness of self, deep inner feelings, an excruciating inner yearning for life and self-expression—and with all this yet to die. It seems like a hoax, which is why one type of cultural man rebels openly against the idea of God. What kind of deity would create such complex and fancy worm food? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- What Kierkegaard is saying, in other words, is that the school of anxiety leads to possibility _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Do Freud and others imagine that surrender to God is masochistic, that to empty oneself is demeaning? Well, answers Rank, it represents on the contrary the furthest reach of the self, the highest idealization man can achieve. It represents the fulfillment of the Agape love-expansion, the achievement of the truly creative type. Only in this way, says Rank, only by surrendering to the bigness of nature on the highest, least-fetishized level, can man conquer death. In other words, the true heroic validation of one’s life lies beyond sex, beyond the other, beyond the private religion—all these are makeshifts that pull man down or that hem him in, leaving him torn with ambiguity. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- In other words, the neurotic isolates himself from others, cannot engage freely in their partialization of the world, and so cannot live by their deceptions about the human condition. He lifts himself out of the “natural therapy _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Rank calls this a paradoxical but deep insight into the essence of neurosis, and he sums it up in the words we have used as an epigraph to this chapter. In fact, it is this and more: it absolutely _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- But few wanted to admit that this work still left the soul perfectly intact as a word to explain the inner energy of organisms, the mystery of the creation and sustenance of living matter. It really _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Thus the plight of modem man: a sinner with no word for it or, worse, who looks for the word for it in a dictionary of psychology and thus only aggravates the problem of his separateness and hyperconsciousness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ontological Abyss
- doesn’t feel that he will die, he only feels sorry for the man next to him.” (Vivekananda- 'everyday people are dying around us, and yet men think they will never die', Maya, the path is narrow, Tolstoy and the farce of the 'individual life', i.e. as nothing) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- It doesn’t matter whether the cultural hero-system is frankly magical, religious, and primitive or secular, scientific, and civilized. It is still a mythical hero-system in which people serve in order to earn a feeling of primary value, of cosmic specialness, of ultimate usefulness to creation, of unshakable meaning. They earn this feeling by carving out a place in nature, by building an edifice that reflects human value: a temple, a cathedral, a totem pole, a skyscraper, a family that spans three generations. The hope and belief is that the things that man creates in society are of lasting worth and meaning, that they outlive or outshine death and decay, that man and his products count. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “As Montaigne said, the peasant has a profound indifference and a patience toward death _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “The knowledge of death is reflective and conceptual, and animals are spared it. They live and they disappear with the same thoughtlessness: a few minutes of fear, a few seconds of anguish, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Mans body is a problem to him that has to be explained. Not only his body is strange, but also its inner landscape, the memories and dreams. Mans very insides—his self—are foreign to him. He doesn't know who he is, why he was born, what he is doing on the planet, what he is supposed to do, what he can expect. His own existence is incomprehensible to him, a miracle just like the rest of creation, closer to him, right near his pounding heart, but for that reason all the more strange. Each thing is a problem, and man can shut out nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- new experience so quickly that he will burst; make him stick out among others, emerge onto dangerous ground, load him up with new responsibilities which need great strength to bear, expose him to new contingencies, new chances. Above all there is the danger of a slip-up, an accident, a chance disease, and of course of death, the final sucking up, the total submergence and negation.” (It feels as thought my self-induced seclusion and use of cannabis has become too overwhelming for me) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- This despair he avoids by building defenses; and these defenses allow him to feel a basic sense of self-worth, of meaningfulness, of power. They allow him to feel that he controls his life and his death, that he really does live and act as a willful and free individual, that he has a unique and self-fashioned identity, that he is somebody not just a trembling accident germinated on a hothouse planet that Carlyle for all time called a 'hall of doom.' _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ...we could understand something the poets and religious geniuses have long known: that the armor of character was so vital to us that to shed it meant to risk death and madness. It is not hard to reason out: If character is a neurotic defense against despair and you shed that defense, you admit the full flood of despair, the full realization of the true human condition, what men are really afraid of, what they struggle against, and are driven toward and away from. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “It was Rank who very early admitted that anxiety could not all be overcome therapeutically, and this is what he meant: that it is impossible to stand up to the terror of one's condition without _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- anxiety.” (Tillich, Kierkegaard, but not Vivekananda. Well, Vivekananda says this is some parts, while in others makes it seem as if there is a 'mysticism' that rises 'above' anxiety. I think Vivekananda does not believe this, since you cannot live in a 'nightmare' without anxiety. It's an ideal, but not a reality for humans: an anxiety free existence, Vivekanada's 'bliss' is an ideal as Kierkegaard's Knight of Faith is, i.e. an impossibility inside of the human condition) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- It can’t be overstressed, one final time, that to see the world as it really is is devastating and terrifying...It makes thoughtless living in the world of men an impossibility. It places a trembling animal at the mercy of the entire cosmos and the problem of the meaning of it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The tragedy of life that Searles is referring to is the one we have been discussing: mans finitude, his dread of death and of the overwhelmingness of life. The schizophrenic feels these more than anyone else because he has not been able to build the confident defenses that a person normally uses to deny them. The schizophrenic's misfortune is that he has been burdened with extra anxieties, extra guilt, extra helplessness, an even more unpredictable and unsupportive environment. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “We see again confirmed the point of view that a persons character is a defense against despair, an attempt to avoid insanity because of the real nature of the world. Searles looks at schizophrenia precisely as the result of the inability to shut out terror, as a desperate style of living with terror. Frankly I don’t know anything more cogent that needs to be said about this syndrome: it is a _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The irony of mans condition is that the deepest need is to be free of the anxiety of death and annihilation; but it is life itself which awakens it, and so we must shrink from being fully alive. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Man emerged from the instinctive thoughtless action of the lower animals and came to reflect on his condition. He was given a consciousness of his individuality and his part-divinity in creation, the beauty and uniqueness of his face and his name. At the same time he was given the consciousness of the terror of the world and of his own death and decay. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “...the final terror of self-consciousness is the knowledge of one’s own death, which is the peculiar sentence on man alone in the animal kingdom. This is the meaning of the Garden of Eden myth and the rediscovery of modem psychology: that death is man s peculiar and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- This is precisely the condition of depression, that one can hardly breathe or move. One of the unconscious tactics that the depressed person resorts to, to try to make sense out of his situation, is to see himself as immensely worthless and guilty. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the depressed person avoids the possibility of independence and more life precisely because these are what threaten him with destruction and death. He holds on to the people who have enslaved him in a network of crushing obligations, belittling interaction, precisely because these people are his shelter, his strength, his protection against the world. Like most everyone else the depressed person will not stand alone on his own center, who cannot draw from within himself the necessary strength to face up to life. So he embeds himself in others; he is sheltered by the necessary and willingly accepts it. But now his tragedy is plain to see: his necessity has become trivial, and so his slavish, dependent, depersonalized life has lost its meaning. It is frightening to be in such a bind. One chooses slavery because it is safe and meaningful; then one loses the meaning of it. but fears to move out of it. One has literally died to life but must remain physically in this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The ugly side of this Promethianism is that it, too, is thoughtless, an empty-headed immersion in the delights of technics with no thought to goals or meaning; so man performs on the moon by hitting golf balls that do not swerve in the lack of atmosphere. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Kierkegaard's torment was the direct result of seeing the world as it really is in relation to his situation as a creature. The prison of one’s character is painstakingly built; to deny one thing and one thing alone: one’s creatureliness. The creatureliness is the terror. Once admit that you are a defecating creature and you invite the primeval ocean of creature anxiety to flood over you. But it is more than creature anxiety, it is also man’s anxiety, the anxiety that results from the human paradox that man is an animal who is conscious of his animal limitation. Anxiety is the result of the perception of the truth of one’s condition. What does it mean to be a self-conscious animal? The idea is ludicrous, if it is not monstrous. It means to know that one is food for worms. This is the terror: to have emerged from nothing, to have a name, consciousness of self, deep inner feelings, an excruciating inner yearning for life and self-expression—and with all this yet to die. It seems like a hoax, which is why one type of cultural man rebels openly against the idea of God. What kind of deity would create such complex and fancy worm food? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The flood of anxiety is not the end for man. It is, rather, a “school _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Education for man means facing up to his natural impotence and death. As Luther urged us: “I say die, i.e., taste death as though it were present. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- What Kierkegaard is saying, in other words, is that the school of anxiety leads to possibility _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...by the destruction of the self through facing up to the anxiety of the terror of existence. The self must be destroyed, brought down to nothing, in order for self-transcendence to begin. Then the self can begin to relate itself to powers beyond itself. It has to thrash around in its finitude, it has to “die _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- One goes through it all to arrive at faith, the faith that one s very creatureliness has some meaning to a Creator; that despite one’s true insignificance, weakness, death, one’s existence has meaning in some ultimate sense because it exists within an eternal and infinite scheme of things brought about and maintained to some kind of design by some creative force. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- We can understand why anxiety “is the possibility of freedom, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- He links his secret inner self, his authentic talent, his deepest feelings of uniqueness, his inner yearning for absolute significance, to the very ground of creation. Out of the ruins of the broken cultural self there remains the mystery of the private, invisible, inner self which yearned for ultimate significance, or cosmic heroism. This invisible mystery at the heart of every creature now attains cosmic significance by affirming its connection with the invisible mystery at the heart of creation. This is the meaning of faith. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Despite all his leanings toward the idea of death, the hopeless situation of the child, the real terror of the external world, and the like, Freud did not need to give them a central place in his thought. He did not need to rework his vision of man from that of primarily a pleasure-seeker of sex to that of the terrified, death-avoiding animal. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “Sometimes just to admit an idea to consciousness is to experience that idea vitally. At other times to admit even a deep anxiety may not mean the actual experience of that anxiety, at _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- least not the deep experience of it, as something else may be troubling the person. Psychoanalysts talk about anxiety without affect. Can one admit the terror of death and still not experience it _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- We saw that the child stands right at the crossroads of the human dualism. He discovers that he has a fallible body, and he is learning that there is a whole cultural world-view that will permit him to triumph over it. The questions about sex that the child asks are thus not— at a fundamental level—about sex at all. They are about the meaning of the body, the terror of living with a body. When the parents give a straightforward biological answer to sexual questions, they do not answer the child’s question at all. He wants to know why he has a body, where it came from, and what it means for a self-conscious creature to be limited by it. He is asking about the ultimate mystery of life, not about the mechanics of sex. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We feel diminished by their human shortcomings. Our interiors feel empty or anguished, our lives valueless, when we see the inevitable pettinesses of the world expressed through the human beings in it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- empty, weaklings. To renounce the world and oneself, to lay the meaning of it to the powers of creation is the hardest thing for man to achieve—and so it's fitting that this task should fall to the _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Do Freud and others imagine that surrender to God is masochistic, that to empty oneself is demeaning? Well, answers Rank, it represents on the contrary the furthest reach of the self, the highest idealization man can achieve. It represents the fulfillment of the Agape love-expansion, the achievement of the truly creative type. Only in this way, says Rank, only by surrendering to the bigness of nature on the highest, least-fetishized level, can man conquer death. In other words, the true heroic validation of one’s life lies beyond sex, beyond the other, beyond the private religion—all these are makeshifts that pull man down or that hem him in, leaving him torn with ambiguity. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Nihiltheism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “Gods can take in the whole of creation because they alone can make sense of it, know what it is all about and for. But as soon as a man lifts his nose from the ground and starts sniffing at eternal problems like life and death, the meaning of a rose or a star cluster—then he is in trouble. Most men spare themselves this trouble by keeping their minds on the small problems of their lives _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “It is one thing to ritually wash one’s hands three times; it is another to wash them until the hands bleed and one is in the bathroom most of the day. Here we see in pure culture, as it were, what is at stake in all human repression: the fear of life and death. Safety in the face of the real _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- There are those who shrink back from experience out of greater life-and-death anxieties. They grow up not giving themselves freely to the cultural roles available to them. They can’t lose themselves thoughtlessly in the games that others play. One reason is that they have trouble relating to others; they haven’t been able to develop the necessary interpersonal skills. Playing the game of society with automatic ease means playing with others without anxiety. If you are not involved in what others take for granted as the nourishment of their lives, then your own life becomes a total problem. At its extreme this describes the schizoid type par excellence. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- the symptom or a bogging down in guilt and futility because of an unlived life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We have seen that what we call the human character is actually a lie about the nature of reality. The causa-sui project is a pretense that one is invulnerable because protected by the power of others and of culture, that one is important in nature and can do something about the world. But in back of the causa-sui project whispers the voice of possible truth: that human life may not be more than a meaningless interlude in a vicious drama of flesh and bones that we call evolution; that the Creator may not care any more for the destiny of man or the self-perpetuation of individual men than He seems to have cared for the dinosaurs or the Tasmanians. The whisper is the same one that slips incongruously out of the Bible in the voice of Ecclesiastes: that all is vanity, vanity of vanities. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- illusions about it, which proves nothing less than, that life is possible only with illusions.” (Ha!) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- the larger sense, a problem of the eclipse of secure communal ideologies of redemption.” (the nightmare of existence does not get solved, Zapffe- 'sure you may be in a 'better' psychological state than me, but I am the better philosopher. Man's Search for Meaning sucks, since it denies the truth of the nightmare of existence and attempts to put forth a knowingly subjective, worthless illusion as 'truth' or 'worth living for') _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Here Rank and Kierkegaard meet in one of those astonishing historical mergers of thought: that sin and neurosis are two ways of talking about the same thing—the complete isolation of the individual, his disharmony with the rest of nature, his hyperindividualism, his attempt to create his own world from within himself. Both sin and neurosis represent the individual blowing himself up to larger than his true size, his refusal to recognize his cosmic dependence. Neurosis, like sin, is an attempt to force nature, to pretend that the causa-sui project really suffices. In sin and neurosis man fetishizes himself on something narrow at hand and pretends that the whole meaning and miraculousness of creation is limited to that, that he can get his beatification. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- I am nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- vis-a-vis God, who alone can make it right in His unknown ways; it is another thing to be nothing to oneself, who is nothing.” _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The customs and myths of traditional society provided a whole interpretation of the meaning of life, ready-made for the individual; all he had to do was to accept living it as true. The modern neurotic must do just this if he is to be “cured _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- himself and has nothing to lean on, no collective drama that makes fantasy seem real because it is lived and shared.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To judge by his own self-accusations of worthlessness, the patient feels an immense burden of guilt. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is a type of person for whom life is a more insurmountable problem than for others, for whom the burden of anxiety and fear is almost as constant as his daily breath. Rank used the term “neurotic _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- and ability of others; nothing seems to him to be able to overcome the inevitable horrors of life and death—except perhaps the fantastic ideational system that he fabricates for his own salvation.” (Ha! That sounds just like me and haas) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- hospitals attest. An impoverished and powerless person—even when he is a perceiver of truth—has no gift to offer to his fellows or to himself. The uncreative psychotic is simply totally crippled by life-and-death fears.” (I always wanted to be more creative. This would make the earthly world easier; and who says that an 'easier' existence is to be pursued? To avoid pain and fear? Ha! Weak and pathetic us human creatures are! Avoid because I don't like feeling a particular way. Just an arbitrary sensation? Naturalism) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- In schizophrenia, like depression, we see the problem of heroics in its stark nudity. How does one become a hero from a position in which he has hardly any resources at all?—a position from which he sees more clearly than anyone else the menacing dangers of life and death and yet has no solid feeling of inner glory to oppose to them? He has to fabricate such a feeling in the best way he can, which will be a clumsy, crippled, and inverted way. No wonder that psychotic transferences are so total, so intense, so all-absorbing, so frightening (when they are not pathetic). _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- especially sensitive it seems more than puzzling, it is disheartening.” (this is the absurd perspective, the problem of relativism/nihilism that is not seen by every one because they have been raised within the relativistic/nihilistic framework, nothing weird about everyone having a different opinion/not being able to find out who's right, if anyone is, and yet not figuring out that all your moral/important demands and judgments are just as nonsensical as the person that you oppose, since there is no way to find out who is right, how come everyone doesn't find this weird?) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- He accepts whatever happens in this visible dimension without complaint, lives his life as a duty, faces his death without a qualm. No pettiness is so petty that it threatens his meanings; no task is too frightening to be beyond his courage. He is fully in the world on its terms and wholly beyond the world in his trust in the invisible dimension. It is very much the old Pietistic ideal that was lived by Kants parents. The great strength of such an ideal is that it allows one to be open, generous, courageous, to touch others' lives and enrich them and open them in turn. As the knight of faith has no fear-of-life-and- death trip to lay onto others, he does not cause them to shrink back upon themselves, he does not coerce or manipulate them. The knight of faith, then, represents what we might call an ideal of mental health, the Continuing openness of life out of the 'death throes of dread'. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- For every shortcoming that we can point to in Freud, we can find a corresponding one in Kierkegaard. If Freud can be said to have erred on the side of the visible, then Kierkegaard can surely be said to have equally erred on the side of the invisible. He turned away from life partly from his fear of life, he embraced death more easily because he had failed in life; his own life was not a voluntary sacrifice undertaken in free will, but a pathetically driven sacrifice. He did not live in the categories in which he thought. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “I am talking matter-of-factly about some of the surest giants in the history of humanity only to say that in the game of life and death no one stands taller than any other, unless it be a true saint, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- ...led Tillich to argue so penetratingly that Eastern mysticism is not for Western man. It is an evasion of the courage to be; it prevents the absorption of maximum meaninglessness into oneself. Tillich s point is that mystical experience seems to be near to perfect faith but is not. Mysticism lacks precisely the element of skepticism, and skepticism is a more radical experience, a more manly confrontation of potential meaninglessness. Even more, we must not forget that much of the time, mysticism as popularly practised is fused with a sense of magical omnipotence: it is actually a manic defense and a denial of creatureliness. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Danger: real probability of the awakening of terror and dread, from which there is no turning back. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- from beyond. How can the person be left there trembling and alone? Offer him the possibility of mystical contact with the void of creation, the power of “It,” his likeness to God, or at the very _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The problem of meaninglessness is the form in which nonbeing poses itself in our time... _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- this planet has to be done in the lived truth of the terror of creation, of the grotesque, of the rumble of panic underneath everything. Otherwise it is false.” (Tillich, which is why 'mysticism' is not the 'stopping point', it is a guide, but it does not overpower the experience of Meaninglessness, Nihilism) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
## Teleological Paradox
- Everything painful and sobering in what psychoanalytic genius and religious genius have discovered about man revolves around the terror of admitting what one is doing to earn his self-esteem. This is why human heroics is a blind drivenness that burns people up; in passionate people, a screaming for glory as uncritical and reflexive as the howling of a dog. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- This is why people have psychotic breaks when repression no longer works, when the forward momentum of activity is no longer possible. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...wondered why most people did not become insane in the face of the existential contradiction between a symbolic self, that seems to give man infinite worth in a timeless scheme of things, and a body that is worth about 98 cents. How to reconcile the two? _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Mans body is a problem to him that has to be explained. Not only his body is strange, but also its inner landscape, the memories and dreams. Mans very insides—his self—are foreign to him. He doesn't know who he is, why he was born, what he is doing on the planet, what he is supposed to do, what he can expect. His own existence is incomprehensible to him, a miracle just like the rest of creation, closer to him, right near his pounding heart, but for that reason all the more strange. Each thing is a problem, and man can shut out nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “What would the average man do with a full consciousness of absurdity? He has fashioned his character for the precise purpose of putting it between himself and the facts of life; it is his special _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- The creativity of people on the schizophrenic end of the human continuum is a creativity that springs from the inability to accept the standardized cultural denials of the real nature of experience. And the price of this kind of almost “extra human _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man is protected by the secure and limited alternatives his society offers him, and if he does not look up from his path he can live out his life with a certain dull security...Why does man accept to live a trivial life? Because of the danger of a full horizon of experience, of course. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- seems literally stupid. He cannot seem to understand the situation he is in, cannot see beyond his own fears, cannot grasp why he has bogged down.” (how does this relate to me? Is this too egotistical a question?) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the depressed person avoids the possibility of independence and more life precisely because these are what threaten him with destruction and death. He holds on to the people who have enslaved him in a network of crushing obligations, belittling interaction, precisely because these people are his shelter, his strength, his protection against the world. Like most everyone else the depressed person will not stand alone on his own center, who cannot draw from within himself the necessary strength to face up to life. So he embeds himself in others; he is sheltered by the necessary and willingly accepts it. But now his tragedy is plain to see: his necessity has become trivial, and so his slavish, dependent, depersonalized life has lost its meaning. It is frightening to be in such a bind. One chooses slavery because it is safe and meaningful; then one loses the meaning of it. but fears to move out of it. One has literally died to life but must remain physically in this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Kierkegaard's torment was the direct result of seeing the world as it really is in relation to his situation as a creature. The prison of one’s character is painstakingly built; to deny one thing and one thing alone: one’s creatureliness. The creatureliness is the terror. Once admit that you are a defecating creature and you invite the primeval ocean of creature anxiety to flood over you. But it is more than creature anxiety, it is also man’s anxiety, the anxiety that results from the human paradox that man is an animal who is conscious of his animal limitation. Anxiety is the result of the perception of the truth of one’s condition. What does it mean to be a self-conscious animal? The idea is ludicrous, if it is not monstrous. It means to know that one is food for worms. This is the terror: to have emerged from nothing, to have a name, consciousness of self, deep inner feelings, an excruciating inner yearning for life and self-expression—and with all this yet to die. It seems like a hoax, which is why one type of cultural man rebels openly against the idea of God. What kind of deity would create such complex and fancy worm food? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The flood of anxiety is not the end for man. It is, rather, a “school _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- We can understand why anxiety “is the possibility of freedom, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- We saw that the child stands right at the crossroads of the human dualism. He discovers that he has a fallible body, and he is learning that there is a whole cultural world-view that will permit him to triumph over it. The questions about sex that the child asks are thus not— at a fundamental level—about sex at all. They are about the meaning of the body, the terror of living with a body. When the parents give a straightforward biological answer to sexual questions, they do not answer the child’s question at all. He wants to know why he has a body, where it came from, and what it means for a self-conscious creature to be limited by it. He is asking about the ultimate mystery of life, not about the mechanics of sex. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- There are those who shrink back from experience out of greater life-and-death anxieties. They grow up not giving themselves freely to the cultural roles available to them. They can’t lose themselves thoughtlessly in the games that others play. One reason is that they have trouble relating to others; they haven’t been able to develop the necessary interpersonal skills. Playing the game of society with automatic ease means playing with others without anxiety. If you are not involved in what others take for granted as the nourishment of their lives, then your own life becomes a total problem. At its extreme this describes the schizoid type par excellence. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- This is why I never wanted to see a psychologist- “Psychology narrows the cause for personal unhappiness down to the person himself, and then he is stuck with himself. But we know _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- analysis in the world doesn't allow the person to find out who he is and why he is here on earth, why he has to die, and how he can make his life a triumph. It is when psychology pretends to do this, _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The customs and myths of traditional society provided a whole interpretation of the meaning of life, ready-made for the individual; all he had to do was to accept living it as true. The modern neurotic must do just this if he is to be “cured _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “All perversions, then, can truly be seen as 'private religions,' as attempts to heroically transcend the human condition and to achieve some kind of satisfaction in that condition. That is why perverts are forever saying how superior and life-enhancing their particular approach is, how they cannot understand why anyone would not prefer it. It is the same sentiment that animates all true believers, the trumpeting of who is the true hero and what is the only genuine _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “To talk about hope is to give the right focus to the problem. It helps us understand why even the thinkers of great stature who got at the heart of human problems could not rest content with the view of the tragical nature of man’s lot that this knowledge gives,. It is today well known how _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- this planet has to be done in the lived truth of the terror of creation, of the grotesque, of the rumble of panic underneath everything. Otherwise it is false.” (Tillich, which is why 'mysticism' is not the 'stopping point', it is a guide, but it does not overpower the experience of Meaninglessness, Nihilism) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_