# Guilt* — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- Uncanniness brings this entity face to face with its undisguised nullity, which belongs to the possibility of its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...this thrownness as a null basis which it has to take up into existence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- This clash, battle, unbridgable gap of the finite/infinite allows for a Heidegger to live most of his life away from people in a cabin, to write Being and Time, live in a secluded cabin most of his life, and yet also join the Nazi party. A person cannot be Authentic! Heidegger's 'Authentic' man is an ideal in itself; it is something to pursue, rather than achieve. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Thus Being-a-basis means never to have power over one's ownmost Being from the ground up. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Care itself, in its very essence, is permeated with nullity through and trough. Thus 'care'- Dasein's Being- means, as thrown projection, Being-the-basis of a nullity (and this being-the-basis is itself null). This means that Dasein as such is guilty, if our formally existential definition of 'guilt' as 'Being-the-basis of a nullity' is indeed correct. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Conscience is the call of care from the uncanniness of Being-in-the-world- the call which summons Dasein to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-guilty. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We miss a 'positive' content in that which is called, because we expect to be told something currently useful about assured possibilities of 'taking action' which are available and calculable. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As the 'they-self, the particular Dasein has been dispersed into the 'they', and must first find itself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Furthermore, a mood of elation can alleviate the manifest burden of Being; that such a mood is possible also discloses the burdensome character of Dasein, even while it alleviates the burden. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In an ontico-existentiell sense, Dasein for the most part evades the Being which discloses the mood. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The expression 'throwness' is meant to suggest the facticity of its being delivered over. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As an entity which has been delivered over to its Being, it remains also delivered over to the fact that it must always have found itself- but found itself in a way of finding which arises not so much from a direct seeking as rather from a fleeing. The way in which the mood discloses is not one in which we at throwness, but one in which we turn towards or turn away. For the most part the mood does not turn towards the burdensome character of Dasein which is manifest in it, and least of all does it do so in the mood of elation when this burden has been alleviated. It is always by way of a state-of-mind that this turning away is what it is. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Existentially, a state-of-mind implies a disclosive submission to the world, out of which we can encounter something that matters to us. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Does such being attuned in which no-thing itself is brought before us happen in human existence? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- no-thing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Being there means beholdenness to no-thing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Beholden to no-thing, existence is already beyond being as a whole. We call this being above and beyond being transcendence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- If existence were not of essence fundamentally transcending, which now means, were it not already beholden to no-thing, then it could not relate itself to being and so not even to itself. Without \(the\) original manifestness of no-thing, no selfhood and no freedom. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Pure being and pure no-thing is the same." This proposition of Hegel's (Science of Logic) is correct. Being and no-thing belong together, not because both of them agree in their indeterminacy and immediacy, but rather because being itself is in essence finite and revealed only in the transcendence of existence enduring no-thing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Being as a whole first comes to itself in accordance with its very own possibility, that is, only in the no-thing of existence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Human existence can relate to being only if it is itself beholden to no-thing. Going above and beyond be-ing is of the essence of existence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Philosophy can never be measured by the yardstick of the idea of science. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Section 54., pg. 247, side-note 268 'begins' to answer this question. (133 of 253 on the pdf file) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Call of Conscious _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Epistemological Rupture
- This calling-back in which conscience calls forth, gives Dasein to understand that Dasein itself- the null basis for its null projection, standing in the possibility of its Being- is to bring itself back to itself from its lostness in the 'they'; and this means that it is guilty. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is easy to see that the conscience which used to be an 'effluence of the divine power' now becomes a slave of Pharisaism. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood, which is often persistent and which is not to be mistaken for a bad mood, is far from nothing at all. Rather it is in this that Dasein becomes satiated with itself. Being has become manifest as burden (my italics). Why that should be, one does not know. And Dasein cannot know anything of the sort... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- 'To be disclosed' does not mean 'to be known as this sort of thing'. And even in the most indifferent and inoffensive everydayness the Being of Dasein can burst forth as a naked 'that it is and has to be. The pure 'that it is' shows itself, but the 'whence' and the 'whither' remain in darkness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- After reading/listening to The Death of Ivan Illych, the illusion of everyone's actions around you is so transparent that it becomes an agony, i.e. 'hell is other people'. It's impossible not to see through the actions of all, once they are seen once. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
## Linguistic Futility
- And yet, if the caller- who is 'nobody', when seen after the manner of the world- is interpreted as a power, this seems to be a dispassionate (a pushing off of responsibility to embrace the Self, to participate, to rush towards the Nothingness) recognition of something that one can 'come across Objectively'. When seen correctly, however, this interpretation is only a fleeing in the face of the conscience- a way for Dasein to escape by slinking away from that thin wall by which the 'they' is separated, as it were, from the uncanniness of its Being. This interpretation of the conscience passes itself off as recognizing the call in the sense of a voice which is 'universally binding, and which speaks in a way that is 'not just subjective'. Furthermore, the 'universal' conscience becomes exalted to a 'world-conscience', which still has the phenomenal character of an 'it' and 'nobody', yet which speaks- there in the individual 'subject'- as this indefinite something. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Ontological Abyss
- We miss a 'positive' content in that which is called, because we expect to be told something currently useful about assured possibilities of 'taking action' which are available and calculable. This expectation has its basis within the horizon of that way of interpreting which forces Dasein's existence to be subsumed under the idea of a business procedure that can be regulated...The call of conscience fails to give any such 'practical' injunctions, solely becayse it summons Dasein to existence, to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self. With the maxims which one might be led to expect- maxims which could be reckoned up unequivovally- the conscience would deny existence nothing less than the very possibility of taking action. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And yet, if the caller- who is 'nobody', when seen after the manner of the world- is interpreted as a power, this seems to be a dispassionate (a pushing off of responsibility to embrace the Self, to participate, to rush towards the Nothingness) recognition of something that one can 'come across Objectively'. When seen correctly, however, this interpretation is only a fleeing in the face of the conscience- a way for Dasein to escape by slinking away from that thin wall by which the 'they' is separated, as it were, from the uncanniness of its Being. This interpretation of the conscience passes itself off as recognizing the call in the sense of a voice which is 'universally binding, and which speaks in a way that is 'not just subjective'. Furthermore, the 'universal' conscience becomes exalted to a 'world-conscience', which still has the phenomenal character of an 'it' and 'nobody', yet which speaks- there in the individual 'subject'- as this indefinite something. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- A free-floating call from which 'nothing ensues' is an impossible fiction when seen existentially. With regard to Dasein, 'that nothing ensues' signifies something positive. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Both the undisturbed equanimity and the inhibited ill-humour of our everyday concern, the way we slip over from one to the other, or slip off into bad moods, are by no means nothing ontologically, even if these phenomena are left unheeded as supposedly the most indifferent and fleeting in Dasein. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood, which is often persistent and which is not to be mistaken for a bad mood, is far from nothing at all. Rather it is in this that Dasein becomes satiated with itself. Being has become manifest as burden (my italics). Why that should be, one does not know. And Dasein cannot know anything of the sort... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- This event is possible and happens, though only rarely and only for an instant, in the fundamental mood of dread \(Angst\). In this sense, dread does not refer to the regularly occurring anxiety that has its source in the fearfulness that so easily appears in us. Dread is fundamentally different from fear. We are afraid of this or that determinate \(kind of\) be-ing which threatens us in this or that regard. Fear of . . . is also in every case being afraid of something determinate. Since fear has about it the limitation of an "of what" and "about what," the frightening and frightful become bound by that in which one finds himself. In striving to save himself from it, from this determinate \(something\), one becomes unsure of himself with regard to everything else, that is, "in a panic" about everything. Dread does not give rise to such confusion. On the contrary, an odd calm pervades it. Dread is indeed always dread of . . ., but not of this or that. Dread of. . .is always dread about. . ., but not about this or that. The indeterminacy of and about what we are in dread is not some sort of failure of determinacy, but rather the essential impossibility of determinacy. This is illustrated by the following familiar explanation. In dread, as we say, "something is uncanny." What do we mean by "something" and "is"? We cannot say what the uncanny something is about. There is something like this about the "as a whole _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- We are "suspended" in dread. More clearly, dread leaves us hanging because it brings on the slipping away of be-ing. So it is that we actual human beings slip away from ourselves in the midst of be-ing. For at bottom this is not uncanny to you or me, but rather "it" is like that. In the shuddering of this suspense, where one can hold on to nothing, only really being there \(Da-sein\) remains. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Dread strikes us dumb. Because be-ing as a whole slips away and straight away no-thing rushes in, every saying "Is" about it is silent in the face of it. That in the uncanniness of dread we even often attempt to break the empty stillness with random chatter is only proof of \(the\) present \(of\) no-thing. That dread discloses no-thing is then immediately confirmed when dread has eased off. In light of what we had just seen while it was still fresh in our memory, we are forced to say that that about and of which we were in dread was "really" nothing at all. Indeed, no-thing itself, as such, was there. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- This demands that we transform our human being into its openness (dread effects this transformation in us) so that we can grasp the nothing that shows up in dread exactly as it shows up. It also demands that we expressly avoid all characterizations of the nothing that do not come from a corresponding experience of the nothing. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- In dread, being as a whole becomes untenable. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- In dread there is found a giving way to..., which is admittedly not so much a fleeing as a spellbound calm. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- In the clear night of dread's no-thing, the original openness of being as such arises for the first time in such a way that it is \(a kind of\) being and not no-thing. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Now what does it mean that this original dread happens only in rare instances? Nothing other than this: no-thing is at first and for the most part disguised in its originality. But how? By our getting lost in being in certain ways. The more we turn to being in our dealings, the less we let being as such slip away, the more we turn away from no-thing. Thus all the more certainly are we forced into the public superficialities of existence. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- That existence is pervaded by nihilating behavior attests to the permanent and indeed obscured manifestness of no-thing that dread originally discloses. But this means original dread is suppressed for the most part in existence. Dread is there. It's only napping. Its breath permanently trembles in existence, only slightly in the apprehensive, and inaudibly in the "Uh húh!" and "Húh uh!" of those who are busy; best of all in the reserved, surest of all at the heart of existence that is daring. But this happens only in those for whom it expends itself in order to preserve the ultimate greatness of existence. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- For the daring, dread is not an opponent of joy or even of the comfortable pleasures of quiet busyness. It shares a secret bond with the cheerfulness and mildness of creative yearning. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Original dread can awaken in existence at any moment. It does not need wakening by an unaccustomed eventuality for that. The depth of its sway corresponds to the scarcity of its possible occasioning. It is permanently on the verge and yet only seldom comes into play to hold us in suspense. The beholdenness of existence to no-thing on the basis of hidden dread makes man the placeholder of no-thing. We are so finite that we are not even able to bring ourselves face to face with no-thing by our own will and resolve. So deeply is mortality buried in our existence that it denies our freedom its very own and deepest finiteness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The beholdenness of existence to no-thing on the basis of hidden dread is the surmounting of being as a whole, transcendence. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Last paragraph on pg. 177, 88 of 294, 29.- Heidegger has a similar sentiment as Nietzsche with regards to science, Nietzsche used music as an example- even if science describes a symphony, mathematically, this says nothing about the lived experienced of hearing the music. Heidegger mentions how science, looking at the world theoretically, has 'dimmed it down' and that 'moods', as with music and Nietzsche, still play a role in science; he further makes the point that this does not reduce science to pure 'feeling'. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- After reading/listening to The Death of Ivan Illych, the illusion of everyone's actions around you is so transparent that it becomes an agony, i.e. 'hell is other people'. It's impossible not to see through the actions of all, once they are seen once. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
## Teleological Paradox
- The pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood, which is often persistent and which is not to be mistaken for a bad mood, is far from nothing at all. Rather it is in this that Dasein becomes satiated with itself. Being has become manifest as burden (my italics). Why that should be, one does not know. And Dasein cannot know anything of the sort... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As surely as we never get a sure grasp of the generality of be-ing in itself, just assurely do we all the same find ourselves somehow placed in the midst of the generality of bare be-ing. In the end, there continues to be \(besteht\)an essential difference between getting a grasp of the whole of be-ing in itself and finding oneself in the midst of be-ing as a whole. The former is impossible in principle. The latter happens all the time in our existence. Of course, it looks just as though in our everyday comings and goings we were holding fast to only just this or that \(kind of\) be-ing, as though we were lost in this or that realm of be-ing. But no matter how fragmented the daily round may seem, it always maintains be-ing in the unity of a "whole," although only in the shadows. Even then and precisely just then, when we are not especially busy with things, this "as a whole" overcomes us; for example, in genuine boredom. This is a long way off far off when this or that book or play, job or leisure activity, is boring. It breaks out when "it's boring." Profound boredom, like a silent fog insinuating itself in the depths of existence, pulls things, others and oneself into it altogether with remarkable indifference. Such boredom reveals be-ing as a whole. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Only because no-thing is manifest at the heart of existence can the full strangeness of being come over us. Only if the strangeness of being impresses us does it waken us and open us up to wonder. Only on the basis of wonder, that is, the manifestness of no-thing, does the "Why?" come up. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Philosophy comes about only through our own life's undergoing a curious engagement with the fundamental possibilities of existence as a whole. Decisive for this engagement is, first of all, making room for be-ing as a whole; next, letting oneself come to no-thing, that is, becoming free of the idols which everyone has and among \(which\) weare in the habit of losing our way; finally, letting this suspense range out into what it permanently swings round to in the basic question of metaphysics which no-thing itself forces on us: Why be-ing, after all, and not rather no-thing? _(REN: (Unassigned))_