# Herman Tønnessen — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- justifying _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- situation _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- This is actually quite comfortable as long as it lasts, let's make the best of it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Let us at least do something useful while we can, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- situation, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- fall _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As for “value, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- integration _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- integration _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The time is close when professional baseball, football, hockey, wrestling, and roller-skating just won't do to keep the labor force under a sufficiently permanent sedation. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A popular suffocating metaphysical hebetant is often found in man's tendency to concentrate all energy and awareness on concrete objects, like the Company, the University, the Community, the Fatherland, Humanity, Culture, Civilization, etc. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In the near future I envisage whole generations who will have reached the millionaires' level of disillusionment at a much earlier age. They will shiver in their nakedness under the white, indifferent stars and cry to psychotherapists for a solid and cozy metaphysical armour. But again there may be some, the true existentialists philosophers, who will rather risk to remain in the chilly outdoors than to give up a jot of the noble privilege of human 'ek-sistence'. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The biosophist is fully aware of the many marvelous metaphysics offering...to anyone who is willing to join this or that suffocating sect, and replace intellectually honest experience with fictitious worldviews. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The situation becomes farcical only when the hobby-man attempts to “unsick _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is not a single sentence among what we today should look upon as adequate transmitters of our most important, surest, and most indisputably significant assertions, which may not at another stage of our insight become an object for ridicule and painful shame. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Epistemological Rupture
- Great intro/summary of thesis, starting with reasons why humans do not experience their 'cosmic situation': “...cognitive...empathetic 'disintegrity'...to hold cognitively incompatible views or positions...to prevent knowledge from penetrating 'volitional' (etc.) personality layers and this permitting it to remain purely 'intellectual'...Man's knack for extracting intervals out of his total term of Being and filling them with work and other pastimes, external sensations, chatter and small talk… _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Another question...is the question of whether such insights can be taught...The so-called 'engaged' discourse introduced in heart-philosophy admits of a third component which we may tentatively designate the degree of integration of knowledge. An example will indicate what may be meant by the expressions “integrated _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man's predicament is this: On the one hand we have man's high spiritual demands for justice, order, meaning,; on the other his, in principle, unlimited capacity for insight and knowledge – perfection, plus his intellectual honesty, constantly sharpened by increased sensibility of the most refined mechanisms of human self-deception, all combined to drive man to face his own desperate incorrigible fate of futility, satiating him with the most sickening aversion against life in general, human existence, and his own 'Dasein' in particular. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...the chances are Zapffe (rather than being cured) would be baffled by Frankl's sophomoric philosophizing. 'You may be psychologically healthier than I,' Zapffe would gladly admit, 'but I must insist that I am a better philosopher. A lifelong search for a meaning in life in general, and of my life in particular, has led me – reluctantly, but with cataclysmic consistency and sleepwalker's certainty – to realize that it's all fantasy and delusions, divinely subsidized to put us at peace with our situation. You are certainly right that psycho-pathological explanations of my biosophical pessimism would be totally irrelevant; but I also fail to see what you can accomplish with your naive, maladroit metaphysics, behind which – if you will permit me to speak your language for once – I see but the profoundest, most fundamental trauma, and that the great universal repression which prevents all fatal insight into man and his cosmic conditions, the mysterious, grotesquely absurd origin and genesis of body and mind, their inalienable interests, and their final and complete obliteration, the return to the synthesis to the absolute zero. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- ...most modern men against the terrifying insight into their conditions, is their safe and busy way of life, which pushes back from their consciousness the intuitive certainty of death, until what is left is a mere rational knowledge of it. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
## Ethical Collapse
- This, to return to the analogy, empowers the crew and passengers in the space-ship to go on, polishing brass and playing bridge, blissfully unaware of their 'cosmic situation.' They are all psychologically healthy, content, well adjusted and accommodated: ontologically secure. They have a feeling of integral selfhood, of personal identity, and of the permanency of things. They believe in their own continuity – in being made of good, lasting stuff – and in meaning and order and justice in life and in the universe. In the most fortunate cases, there is a good, healthy unconditional surrender and submission to the norms of nicety and normalcy of the average, square-headed, stuffed-shirted, sanctimonious, middle-class North-American church-goer and bridge player, with his pseudo-intelligent, quasi-progressive, simili-cultured, platitudinal small-talk. Happy days! In this the best of all possible worlds. One doesn't notice until too late. In short: All is well (since nobody notices the end of 'all that is well') until one night: the day's work is well done and all the ships' crapulant fools frantically engulf themselves in a deadly serious game of bridge (till it is time for the night-cap and the tranquillizer). One of the 'dummies,' a champion brass polisher, suffering from an acute case of uncaused depression, goes to lie down for a while; he doesn't have a dime for the jukebox; the room is painfully satiated with embarrassing silence. Instantly and unexpectedly he is struck by an execrative curse of inverted serendipity. He suddenly, in unbearable agony, sees himself as an upholstered pile of bones and knuckles, with the softer parts slung up in a bad on the front side, and his whole like as a ludicrously brief interlude between embryo and corpse, two repulsive caricatures of himself. As for this flying farce, this nauseatingly trivial burlesque in a whirling coffin, and its aimless, whimsical flight through the void: 'What is it all about?' The question permeates him with dread and anguish, with 'ontological despair' and 'existential frustration.' 'Angsten' (Kierkegaard) constrains out of him all his puny, piddling hatreds, and petty ambitions in brass and bridge, and fills him with care and compassion for his fellow travelers. In other words, he has become a philosopher, an alienated, nostalgic 'cosmopath,' and, eo ipso, a case for psychologists and psychotherapists, some of whom want to study him and label his 'Daseinsweise,' others to 'unsick' him as well. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Ordinary language...it lulls us into this platitudinal world of small-talk where everything is taken for granted: life, death, the world, and man's fate in it, the society, the language. No reason to wonder or worry; everything is what it is and not another thing. The world is what it seems to be to a dry, unimaginative, down to earth, square-headed stuffshirt about mid-morning after a good night's rest. And as for such questions as what it means to live and die – there's nothing to it, it is commonplace, almost everybody does it. We are thrown into an absurdly indifferent world of sticks and stones and stars and emptiness. Our “situation _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Man's predicament is this: On the one hand we have man's high spiritual demands for justice, order, meaning,; on the other his, in principle, unlimited capacity for insight and knowledge – perfection, plus his intellectual honesty, constantly sharpened by increased sensibility of the most refined mechanisms of human self-deception, all combined to drive man to face his own desperate incorrigible fate of futility, satiating him with the most sickening aversion against life in general, human existence, and his own 'Dasein' in particular. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Aristotle said that a society, unprepared for true leisure, will degenerate in good times. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- One of the simplest forms of suffocation (offering happiness and peace of mind through the most comfortable evasions and illusions) consists in nothing more than just the lowering of the levels of such “meaning demands. A modern man may find satisfaction of his ontological needs in a combination of experience and imagination in a pia desideria for 'victory of the supreme good,' 'eternal peace,' a superior culture', 'health and happiness for all men,'longevity, 'liberation of undreamt-of physical forces,' intergalactic space flights,' etc. one more unbearably exciting than the other. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
## Linguistic Futility
- This, to return to the analogy, empowers the crew and passengers in the space-ship to go on, polishing brass and playing bridge, blissfully unaware of their 'cosmic situation.' They are all psychologically healthy, content, well adjusted and accommodated: ontologically secure. They have a feeling of integral selfhood, of personal identity, and of the permanency of things. They believe in their own continuity – in being made of good, lasting stuff – and in meaning and order and justice in life and in the universe. In the most fortunate cases, there is a good, healthy unconditional surrender and submission to the norms of nicety and normalcy of the average, square-headed, stuffed-shirted, sanctimonious, middle-class North-American church-goer and bridge player, with his pseudo-intelligent, quasi-progressive, simili-cultured, platitudinal small-talk. Happy days! In this the best of all possible worlds. One doesn't notice until too late. In short: All is well (since nobody notices the end of 'all that is well') until one night: the day's work is well done and all the ships' crapulant fools frantically engulf themselves in a deadly serious game of bridge (till it is time for the night-cap and the tranquillizer). One of the 'dummies,' a champion brass polisher, suffering from an acute case of uncaused depression, goes to lie down for a while; he doesn't have a dime for the jukebox; the room is painfully satiated with embarrassing silence. Instantly and unexpectedly he is struck by an execrative curse of inverted serendipity. He suddenly, in unbearable agony, sees himself as an upholstered pile of bones and knuckles, with the softer parts slung up in a bad on the front side, and his whole like as a ludicrously brief interlude between embryo and corpse, two repulsive caricatures of himself. As for this flying farce, this nauseatingly trivial burlesque in a whirling coffin, and its aimless, whimsical flight through the void: 'What is it all about?' The question permeates him with dread and anguish, with 'ontological despair' and 'existential frustration.' 'Angsten' (Kierkegaard) constrains out of him all his puny, piddling hatreds, and petty ambitions in brass and bridge, and fills him with care and compassion for his fellow travelers. In other words, he has become a philosopher, an alienated, nostalgic 'cosmopath,' and, eo ipso, a case for psychologists and psychotherapists, some of whom want to study him and label his 'Daseinsweise,' others to 'unsick' him as well. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Ordinary language...it lulls us into this platitudinal world of small-talk where everything is taken for granted: life, death, the world, and man's fate in it, the society, the language. No reason to wonder or worry; everything is what it is and not another thing. The world is what it seems to be to a dry, unimaginative, down to earth, square-headed stuffshirt about mid-morning after a good night's rest. And as for such questions as what it means to live and die – there's nothing to it, it is commonplace, almost everybody does it. We are thrown into an absurdly indifferent world of sticks and stones and stars and emptiness. Our “situation _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- There is a nagging suspicion that the diagnostics are exploiting Heidegger's exotic language in order to “keep talking, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- He may be paying lip-service to the idea of humanization while at the same time surreptitiously practicing suffocation by exploiting the traditional ontological hebetants: work, religion, metaphysics, alcohol, drugs, lobotomy, everydayness, noseyness, external sensations, ordinary language prose, platitudinal small-talk, or chatter, role-playing, role experiences, social norms, rigidity, insanity or conformity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the chances are Zapffe (rather than being cured) would be baffled by Frankl's sophomoric philosophizing. 'You may be psychologically healthier than I,' Zapffe would gladly admit, 'but I must insist that I am a better philosopher. A lifelong search for a meaning in life in general, and of my life in particular, has led me – reluctantly, but with cataclysmic consistency and sleepwalker's certainty – to realize that it's all fantasy and delusions, divinely subsidized to put us at peace with our situation. You are certainly right that psycho-pathological explanations of my biosophical pessimism would be totally irrelevant; but I also fail to see what you can accomplish with your naive, maladroit metaphysics, behind which – if you will permit me to speak your language for once – I see but the profoundest, most fundamental trauma, and that the great universal repression which prevents all fatal insight into man and his cosmic conditions, the mysterious, grotesquely absurd origin and genesis of body and mind, their inalienable interests, and their final and complete obliteration, the return to the synthesis to the absolute zero. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- If a student has difficulties in getting to the university because of their fear of stepping on cracks in the pavement, this is not a problem to be taken seriously or the cognitive level; in other words, it doesn't raise the problem: 'is it really dangerous to step on cracks in the pavement?' It is quite a different story if the student has 'working inhibitions,' because he has struck against the stark problem of death and annihilation. His stomach is clawed to shreds, his breathing throttled by the anguish of nothingness, the dread of being no more. His behavior, his feelings, and emotions may deviate so far from what is presently considered customary that there is no question of their abnormality, in at least one possible sense of 'abnormality.' But his reasons for the 'deviation' may not be troubles in adjusting to narrow 'social' aspects of his environment, as is the case with our first student, but caused by the unusual awakening to a clear and penetrating awareness of a vast 'cosmic' environment to which there is no adjustment possible. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Thrown into an eternally changing universe, human beings cannot be tied by a set of rigid rules for language, thought, or action. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ontological Abyss
- This, to return to the analogy, empowers the crew and passengers in the space-ship to go on, polishing brass and playing bridge, blissfully unaware of their 'cosmic situation.' They are all psychologically healthy, content, well adjusted and accommodated: ontologically secure. They have a feeling of integral selfhood, of personal identity, and of the permanency of things. They believe in their own continuity – in being made of good, lasting stuff – and in meaning and order and justice in life and in the universe. In the most fortunate cases, there is a good, healthy unconditional surrender and submission to the norms of nicety and normalcy of the average, square-headed, stuffed-shirted, sanctimonious, middle-class North-American church-goer and bridge player, with his pseudo-intelligent, quasi-progressive, simili-cultured, platitudinal small-talk. Happy days! In this the best of all possible worlds. One doesn't notice until too late. In short: All is well (since nobody notices the end of 'all that is well') until one night: the day's work is well done and all the ships' crapulant fools frantically engulf themselves in a deadly serious game of bridge (till it is time for the night-cap and the tranquillizer). One of the 'dummies,' a champion brass polisher, suffering from an acute case of uncaused depression, goes to lie down for a while; he doesn't have a dime for the jukebox; the room is painfully satiated with embarrassing silence. Instantly and unexpectedly he is struck by an execrative curse of inverted serendipity. He suddenly, in unbearable agony, sees himself as an upholstered pile of bones and knuckles, with the softer parts slung up in a bad on the front side, and his whole like as a ludicrously brief interlude between embryo and corpse, two repulsive caricatures of himself. As for this flying farce, this nauseatingly trivial burlesque in a whirling coffin, and its aimless, whimsical flight through the void: 'What is it all about?' The question permeates him with dread and anguish, with 'ontological despair' and 'existential frustration.' 'Angsten' (Kierkegaard) constrains out of him all his puny, piddling hatreds, and petty ambitions in brass and bridge, and fills him with care and compassion for his fellow travelers. In other words, he has become a philosopher, an alienated, nostalgic 'cosmopath,' and, eo ipso, a case for psychologists and psychotherapists, some of whom want to study him and label his 'Daseinsweise,' others to 'unsick' him as well. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Intellectual honesty and Man's high spiritual demand for order and meaning, may drive Man to the deepest antipathy for life and necessitate, as one existential philosopher chooses to express it: 'A 'no' to this wild, banal, grotesque, and loathsome carnival in the world's graveyard.' _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Ordinary language...it lulls us into this platitudinal world of small-talk where everything is taken for granted: life, death, the world, and man's fate in it, the society, the language. No reason to wonder or worry; everything is what it is and not another thing. The world is what it seems to be to a dry, unimaginative, down to earth, square-headed stuffshirt about mid-morning after a good night's rest. And as for such questions as what it means to live and die – there's nothing to it, it is commonplace, almost everybody does it. We are thrown into an absurdly indifferent world of sticks and stones and stars and emptiness. Our “situation _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The fact that a patient is classified as mentally or emotionally sick prevents the psychotherapist from inquiring into the possibility of whether, or to what extent, his patient might be cognitively right. It is perfectly possible that a person with 'existential frustration,' 'ontological despair,' or simply 'sub-clinical depression' may, because of his abnormal position, be in a better position to look through the camouflage of life that still is deceiving the 'healthy' psychotherapists. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Man's predicament is this: On the one hand we have man's high spiritual demands for justice, order, meaning,; on the other his, in principle, unlimited capacity for insight and knowledge – perfection, plus his intellectual honesty, constantly sharpened by increased sensibility of the most refined mechanisms of human self-deception, all combined to drive man to face his own desperate incorrigible fate of futility, satiating him with the most sickening aversion against life in general, human existence, and his own 'Dasein' in particular. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- One of the simplest forms of suffocation (offering happiness and peace of mind through the most comfortable evasions and illusions) consists in nothing more than just the lowering of the levels of such “meaning demands. A modern man may find satisfaction of his ontological needs in a combination of experience and imagination in a pia desideria for 'victory of the supreme good,' 'eternal peace,' a superior culture', 'health and happiness for all men,'longevity, 'liberation of undreamt-of physical forces,' intergalactic space flights,' etc. one more unbearably exciting than the other. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...the chances are Zapffe (rather than being cured) would be baffled by Frankl's sophomoric philosophizing. 'You may be psychologically healthier than I,' Zapffe would gladly admit, 'but I must insist that I am a better philosopher. A lifelong search for a meaning in life in general, and of my life in particular, has led me – reluctantly, but with cataclysmic consistency and sleepwalker's certainty – to realize that it's all fantasy and delusions, divinely subsidized to put us at peace with our situation. You are certainly right that psycho-pathological explanations of my biosophical pessimism would be totally irrelevant; but I also fail to see what you can accomplish with your naive, maladroit metaphysics, behind which – if you will permit me to speak your language for once – I see but the profoundest, most fundamental trauma, and that the great universal repression which prevents all fatal insight into man and his cosmic conditions, the mysterious, grotesquely absurd origin and genesis of body and mind, their inalienable interests, and their final and complete obliteration, the return to the synthesis to the absolute zero. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- If a student has difficulties in getting to the university because of their fear of stepping on cracks in the pavement, this is not a problem to be taken seriously or the cognitive level; in other words, it doesn't raise the problem: 'is it really dangerous to step on cracks in the pavement?' It is quite a different story if the student has 'working inhibitions,' because he has struck against the stark problem of death and annihilation. His stomach is clawed to shreds, his breathing throttled by the anguish of nothingness, the dread of being no more. His behavior, his feelings, and emotions may deviate so far from what is presently considered customary that there is no question of their abnormality, in at least one possible sense of 'abnormality.' But his reasons for the 'deviation' may not be troubles in adjusting to narrow 'social' aspects of his environment, as is the case with our first student, but caused by the unusual awakening to a clear and penetrating awareness of a vast 'cosmic' environment to which there is no adjustment possible. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...most modern men against the terrifying insight into their conditions, is their safe and busy way of life, which pushes back from their consciousness the intuitive certainty of death, until what is left is a mere rational knowledge of it. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The existentialists, on the other hand, find a life lived in utter awareness of man's cosmic conditions to be a life void of human dignity, a life not worthy of living. Every human being should be forced to mature beyond what is biologically advantageous, mentally 'healthy,' forced to face his fate, and open his eyes and mind to the unbearably agonizing insight into 'the wild, banal, grotesque, loathsome carnival in the world's graveyard. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
## Teleological Paradox
- Great intro/summary of thesis, starting with reasons why humans do not experience their 'cosmic situation': “...cognitive...empathetic 'disintegrity'...to hold cognitively incompatible views or positions...to prevent knowledge from penetrating 'volitional' (etc.) personality layers and this permitting it to remain purely 'intellectual'...Man's knack for extracting intervals out of his total term of Being and filling them with work and other pastimes, external sensations, chatter and small talk… _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- This, to return to the analogy, empowers the crew and passengers in the space-ship to go on, polishing brass and playing bridge, blissfully unaware of their 'cosmic situation.' They are all psychologically healthy, content, well adjusted and accommodated: ontologically secure. They have a feeling of integral selfhood, of personal identity, and of the permanency of things. They believe in their own continuity – in being made of good, lasting stuff – and in meaning and order and justice in life and in the universe. In the most fortunate cases, there is a good, healthy unconditional surrender and submission to the norms of nicety and normalcy of the average, square-headed, stuffed-shirted, sanctimonious, middle-class North-American church-goer and bridge player, with his pseudo-intelligent, quasi-progressive, simili-cultured, platitudinal small-talk. Happy days! In this the best of all possible worlds. One doesn't notice until too late. In short: All is well (since nobody notices the end of 'all that is well') until one night: the day's work is well done and all the ships' crapulant fools frantically engulf themselves in a deadly serious game of bridge (till it is time for the night-cap and the tranquillizer). One of the 'dummies,' a champion brass polisher, suffering from an acute case of uncaused depression, goes to lie down for a while; he doesn't have a dime for the jukebox; the room is painfully satiated with embarrassing silence. Instantly and unexpectedly he is struck by an execrative curse of inverted serendipity. He suddenly, in unbearable agony, sees himself as an upholstered pile of bones and knuckles, with the softer parts slung up in a bad on the front side, and his whole like as a ludicrously brief interlude between embryo and corpse, two repulsive caricatures of himself. As for this flying farce, this nauseatingly trivial burlesque in a whirling coffin, and its aimless, whimsical flight through the void: 'What is it all about?' The question permeates him with dread and anguish, with 'ontological despair' and 'existential frustration.' 'Angsten' (Kierkegaard) constrains out of him all his puny, piddling hatreds, and petty ambitions in brass and bridge, and fills him with care and compassion for his fellow travelers. In other words, he has become a philosopher, an alienated, nostalgic 'cosmopath,' and, eo ipso, a case for psychologists and psychotherapists, some of whom want to study him and label his 'Daseinsweise,' others to 'unsick' him as well. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_