# Huston Smith — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- Revelations can be terrifying. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Secular modes of thought could handicap receivers today, causing them to discount intimations they might otherwise take seriously... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- …even the cures of souls has become, through psychiatry, a secular pursuit. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There could not have been a more fanatical zealot for naturalism than Huston Smith the graduate student at the University of Chicago, but shortly before I exited that university my naturalistic worldview collapsed like a house of cards...Mysticism had scarcely figured in my education, but when it was placed before me undismissively, I saw it as true. There is a reality other than the one that science and common sense – a workable definition of naturalism – set before us...more ultimate, more powerful, more awesome, more significant, and more mysterious...My instructors had taught me that Plato's Allegory of the Cave was a brilliant piece of speculation, and yes, magnificent poetry too, but the book I was reading presented it as true...I soon discovered that its fundamental dichotomy – between this world and another world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The world into which I was ushered was strange, weird, uncanny, significant, and terrifying beyond belief. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- As in Plato's myth of the cave, what I was seeing struck me with the force of the sun, in comparison with which everyday experience reveals only a flickering shadows in a dim cavern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Drug experiences that assume a religious cast tend to have fearful and/or beatific features. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Drugs appear to be able to induce religious experiences; it is less evident that they can produce religious lives. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The conclusion to which the evidence seems currently to point is that it is indeed possible for chemicals to enhance the religious life, but only when they are set within the context of faith (conviction that what they discover is true) and discipline (exercise of the will toward fulfilling what the disclosures ask of us). Nowhere today in Western civilization are both of these conditions met. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Epistemological Rupture
- I suspect that psychedelic religious experiences are having, and for the foreseeable future will continue to have, less faith-filled carryover than those that occur spontaneously...The most important one is conviction, carrying over into the non-drug state, that the insights that emerge in the theophany are true...The experience's content is certain because doubts that could enter only from the perspective of this world, which world pales before (where it is not obliterated by) the world into which the see-er has stepped...Except in the tragic case of psychotics, however, this world eventually reasserts itself and its claims press hard upon us, which claims in our culture challenge the validity of pharmacological theophanies. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Linguistic Futility
- It should not be assumed from what I have written that the experience was pleasurable. The accurate words are significance and terror. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Ecstasy! In common parlance ecstasy is fun. But ecstasy is not fun. Your very soul is seized and shaken until it tingles. After all, who will choose to feel undiluted awe? The unknowing vulgar abuse the word; we must recapture its full and terrifying sense. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
## Ontological Abyss
- The most empathic epiphanies are those that arrive in times of darkness and despair. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ...loneliness, withdrawal, identity confusion, and existential dread...Thanks to the fact that our society has become impersonal... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_