# John Bunyan — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- One morning as I lay in my bed, I was, as at other times, most fiercely assaulted with this temptation to sell and part with Christ, the wicked suggestion still running in my mind, “Sell Him, sell Him, sell Him, sell Him, _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- No, no, not for thousands, thousands, thousands, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Let Him go if He will. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And again, had not God given such a discovery of the sad condition of those that are for the most part rich men, we should have had men concluded absolutely that the rich are the blessed men. Nay, albeit the Lord himself doth so evidently declare that the rich ones of the world are, for the most part, in the saddest condition, yet they, through unbelief, or else presumption, do harden themselves, and seek for the glory of this world... _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Epistemological Rupture
- I did ever so know now what it was to be weary of my life and yet afraid to die. I Oh, how gladly I would have been anybody but myself, anything but a man, and in any condition but my own. There was nothing that did cross my mind more frequently than that it was impossible for me to be forgiven my transgression and be saved from the wrath to come. (Tolstoy, Kierkegaard, Cioran) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ontological Abyss
- I did ever so know now what it was to be weary of my life and yet afraid to die. I Oh, how gladly I would have been anybody but myself, anything but a man, and in any condition but my own. There was nothing that did cross my mind more frequently than that it was impossible for me to be forgiven my transgression and be saved from the wrath to come. (Tolstoy, Kierkegaard, Cioran) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For, as I said before, it is evident, that they who live after the flesh in the lusts thereof, do not really and seriously think on death, and the judgment that doth follow after: neither do they indeed endeavour so to do; for did they, it would make them say with holy Job, 'All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come' (Job 14:14). And as I said before, that not only the wicked, but also the godly have their time to depart this life. And the beggar died. The saints of the Lord, they must be deprived of this life also, they must yield up the ghost into the hands of the Lord their God; they must also be separated from their wives, children, husbands, friends, goods, and all that they have in the world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_