# Mitchell Heisman — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- ...the most important question is whether there is an important question. The only serious question is whether there is anything to take seriously. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- far back _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The attempt to be consistently materialistic yielded the tentative conclusion that the attempt to be consistently materialistic is rational self-destruction. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the consequence or extension of this original experiment on myself. After exploring an unadulterated materialistic view, life lost its cogency for me.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “If humans are emotion machines, then music must work, in some sense, like a machine. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- technology. From the standpoint of this musical materialism, as one of the most extreme implications of an unadulterated materialism, lay a possible solution to dominance of my own _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- analytic and objective tendency to materialize everything. I began to listen to music, especially German music (and especially Wagner and Bach), as a form of technology to counter my own tendencies to view everything as material or technology.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- From a Darwinistic view, every capacity for emotion evolved as a product of genetic adaptation. Emotions, then, are biochemical-based illusions that evolved to propagate genes. Pleasure, happiness, emotions, and desire: these are the evolutionary tricks that promoted the survival of our ancestors. The “happiness _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- sadness _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- happiness _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “The attempt to eliminate all subjective bias would culminate in the elimination of science, for science has failed to produce evidence that it is capable of fully justifying itself. The very existence of science is the strongest evidence that scientists are less than fully objective. An attempted self-consistent objectivity is a self-destructing objectivity, since the bias of the subjective belief in the value of objectivity must be removed to be objective. This implies that an _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- theory of all _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- How, then, does a scientist choose a subject to study? Is there a way to objectively determine what the subject of objectivity should be? Is there a fundamentally objective reason for choosing the study of archaeology over the study of chemistry? Is the decision to study Sanskrit over Chinese more rational than the decision to worship Allah over not worshiping Allah? Is there a fundamentally rational ground for making one choice over another? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- choose _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- If I had no biases I would be dead, rather that sitting here right now, writing about them. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- This means, however, that for the average Westerner who plays the basic ‘Euclidean’ rules of the liberal democratic system, my ‘non-Euclidean’ logic will likely appear to be “irrational _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- nature _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- universally condemned, does this mean that I do not have a valid point or does it mean _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The literal act of killing myself is a literal act of willing the progress of equality — the equality of the biological and the physical — by overcoming biological boundaries that preserve biology “above _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Just as life is a process, the undoing of life is also a process or “progress _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “From a materialist, Darwinist standpoint, I and every other human is an animal and a _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- material object. All emotions, whether joy or misery, elation or depression, are rooted in behavior that proved to be genetically adaptive for animal ancestors.” (this is not a piece of apologetics from an evangelical christian, this is a dude who held to this, experienced this materialist worldview, and killed himself from it) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- material _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “The decisive turn that made me different, or consummated my self-destructive difference from others, was really this experiment on myself where I systematically interpreted all subjective experience: emotions, experiences, intuitions, instincts as physical material; not better or worse _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- than any other physical material. This experiment, in its conception, amounts to a definition of disillusionment. Originally, the procedure was built on a radical selfishness— not belief in selfishness, but a tentative-programmatic one based on the tentative assumption that no premise is _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- fundamentally justified.” (fuck, this Naturalism is 'disillusionment', agreed) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “Emotions are the root of beliefs. To destroy all beliefs, all belief in emotion must be destroyed. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- After systematically interpreting my emotions are material processes for at least a year and a half, the cause of life simply lost its cogency.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- -”Instead of attempting to overcoming my socially self-destructive tendencies, I gave them free reign. Instead of doing what strengthening, I do what is weakening. Instead of doing what is considered socially acceptable, I do what is considered humiliating. These little self-destructions help feed the larger ones. Yet, at the same time, it means in at least some respects, it means I _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- pay my rent and work out to keep myself physically fit, so I am in a position to achieve the most rational and most comprehensive self-negation.” (fuck, this is me) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- You must in some sense believe the subjective state of fear, and not anticipate and out-compete it with an objective, physical-material reduction, in order to take it seriously. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...I ultimately concluded that unadulterated material objectivity was probably the most basic source of the problem itself...This meant that I could take myself apart in some ways, but I could not put myself back together. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the question of whether there is an important question is the most important question, then testing this question is closest thing to importance. Since counterarguments almost always _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Who is to say that a life of a saint, an artist, or a philosopher is superior to a life sniffing glue. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- To engage in human relationships is to dwell within a mythological world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- If reason cannot determine fundamental values, then reason can be used to justify literally anything. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- bottom _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Epistemological Rupture
- The implications of life’s meaninglessness have not been elicited with sufficient ruthlessness. My methodology is honesty to the point of absurdity; honesty without mercy; honesty unprejudiced by morals, aesthetics, faith, or hope. When all illusions have been dispelled, at the end of overcoming subjectivities, biases, and prejudices towards life, one encounters the possibility of rational negation of self-interest; rational self-annihilation; rational self-destruction. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out precisely those truths that are most deadly and destructive to me. To will death through truth and truth through death. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- My formula for self-destruction is truth seeking. Doing so diverts me away from a normal path, the biological path or the path of life, and the entire mythological cave of human relationships. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is a fundamental hypothesis of this work that, not indifference, but an active blind spot to certain kinds of “truth _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is likely that most people will not even consider the veracity of this correlation between death and objectivity even if they understand it intellectually because most will consciously or unconsciously choose to place the interests of self-preservation over the interests of objectivity. In other words, to even consider the validity of this view assumes that one is willing and able to even consider prioritizing objectivity over one’s own self-preservation. Since it not safe to simply assume this on an individual level, let alone a social level, relatively few are willing and able to seriously address this issue (and majority consensus can be expected to dismiss the issue). In short, for most people, including most “scientists _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- I cannot fully reconcile my understanding of the world with my existence in it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “To pursue science, scientists must be justified by something that, strictly speaking, is not science itself, i.e. curiosity, wonder, faith in science, the will to master all knowledge, belief that _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- it will benefit the world, belief in pure knowledge for its own sake, or some other breach of objectivity. Because science, apparently, cannot consistently justify itself, something else must if it is to exist at all.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- My objective is to kill myself. Now how can I explain this? If reason cannot determine ultimate values, then how do I explain the facts of my values? I can begin to explain myself through the Nietzschean distinction between truth and life. It is a modern delusion to believe that pursuit of truth has any necessary correspondence with life-affirming values. To not gloss over the forks between these paths with myths and compromises, but to confront them openly, directly, and as far as possible, without illusion, can lead to the path of truth and death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Yet if Gödel is right, then it may be that to understand yourself is to understand that you can _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I cannot synthesize this work with my living, sociobiological existence. I cannot live with the implications of my work and this leaves the possibility of separating the interests of truth and life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “The distinction between the desire to know and the will to know is key here. The desire to know, motivated only by curiosity or pleasure, tends to be selective. The desire to know tends to ignore, repress, or otherwise not confront what is not conducive to pleasure or happiness. The will to _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- know is confrontation with all as it comes in life and a seeking out of the least pleasurable and the least joyous truths. This distinction is imperative here because I interpreted happiness, pleasure, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- My formula for self-destruction is truth seeking. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ethical Collapse
- “The following is an experiment in nihilism. Already I have contradicted myself! How can one believe in disbelief? I might be a nihilist except that I don’t believe in anything. If there is no extant God and no extant gods, no good and no evil, no right and no wrong, no meaning and no purpose; if there are no values that are inherently valuable; no justice that is ultimately justifiable; no reasoning that is fundamentally rational, then there is no sane way to choose _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “If reason is incapable of deducing ultimate, nonarbitrary human ends, and nothing can be judged as ultimately more important than anything else, then freedom is equal to slavery; cruelty is equal to kindness; love is equal to hate; war is equal to peace; dignity is equal to contempt; _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The implications of life’s meaninglessness have not been elicited with sufficient ruthlessness. My methodology is honesty to the point of absurdity; honesty without mercy; honesty unprejudiced by morals, aesthetics, faith, or hope. When all illusions have been dispelled, at the end of overcoming subjectivities, biases, and prejudices towards life, one encounters the possibility of rational negation of self-interest; rational self-annihilation; rational self-destruction. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out precisely those truths that are most deadly and destructive to me. To will death through truth and truth through death. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Self-consistent materialism leads to interpreting every subjective experience, i.e. fear, love, inspiration, dreams, etc., as physical matter. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Were Nietzsche and the Athenians right about Socrates? Reason appears unable to determine values and, therefore, the entire Western pretension to rationalism is a kind of joke. And even worse, it’s not even a good joke. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The most consistent physicalism, a physicalism that makes no exceptions whatsoever for subjective experiences such as instincts, intuitions, and emotions, leads to rational self-destruction or rational death. Self-consistent materialism leads to interpreting every subjective experience, i.e. fear, love, inspiration, dreams, etc., as physical matter. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “While one may feel compassion, does this mean that one lacks the capacity to discipline one’s self from being mastered by that impulse. That people are mastered by such impulses is only another confirmation of Darwin’s insight that humans are animals. Most humans are driven _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Linguistic Futility
- Music could be a form of emotional technology to control my own behavior intelligently. In other words, if emotions are the products of material processes, then art could be viewed as a form of _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- It is likely that most people will not even consider the veracity of this correlation between death and objectivity even if they understand it intellectually because most will consciously or unconsciously choose to place the interests of self-preservation over the interests of objectivity. In other words, to even consider the validity of this view assumes that one is willing and able to even consider prioritizing objectivity over one’s own self-preservation. Since it not safe to simply assume this on an individual level, let alone a social level, relatively few are willing and able to seriously address this issue (and majority consensus can be expected to dismiss the issue). In short, for most people, including most “scientists _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “To pursue science, scientists must be justified by something that, strictly speaking, is not science itself, i.e. curiosity, wonder, faith in science, the will to master all knowledge, belief that _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Even once one has decided on some facet of reality, there is still the problem of interpretation. Consider the interpretation that my interpretation is just a way of throwing order upon the chaos of the world. Is this interpretation itself a just a way of throwing order on the chaos of the world? Even the word “chaos _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Every word, every thought, and every emotion come back to one core problem: life is _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Ontological Abyss
- “The following is an experiment in nihilism. Already I have contradicted myself! How can one believe in disbelief? I might be a nihilist except that I don’t believe in anything. If there is no extant God and no extant gods, no good and no evil, no right and no wrong, no meaning and no purpose; if there are no values that are inherently valuable; no justice that is ultimately justifiable; no reasoning that is fundamentally rational, then there is no sane way to choose _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- between science, religion, racism, philosophy, nationalism, art, conservatism, nihilism, liberalism, surrealism, fascism, asceticism, egalitarianism, subjectivism, elitism, ismism.” _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “If reason is incapable of deducing ultimate, nonarbitrary human ends, and nothing can be judged as ultimately more important than anything else, then freedom is equal to slavery; cruelty is equal to kindness; love is equal to hate; war is equal to peace; dignity is equal to contempt; _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- destruction is equal to creation; life is equal to death and death is equal to life.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Can one live a philosophy of the nihilistic, reconciling meaninglessness with every thought and emotion at every moment? If active unbelief were the highest organizing principle of a life, would the consequence be rational self-destruction? Could suicide represent the pinnacle of the rational life realized? _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Nihilism is where science and philosophy meet. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Nihilism could be interpreted as the inherent paradox of living a belief in disbelief. So called “nihilism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- justification for belief in the authority of one’s instincts and emotions, and, lack of justification for belief that God exists.” (the seeming difference between Nihilism and skepticism) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Willing death is, then, an attempt to live a nihilistic life. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “If no values are inherently valuable, then life has no inherent value. If life has no inherent purpose, then its end could be directed towards its negation or death. Death could be posited as the highest value. Since the other secular values are premised upon life, death is the test of all the _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The implications of life’s meaninglessness have not been elicited with sufficient ruthlessness. My methodology is honesty to the point of absurdity; honesty without mercy; honesty unprejudiced by morals, aesthetics, faith, or hope. When all illusions have been dispelled, at the end of overcoming subjectivities, biases, and prejudices towards life, one encounters the possibility of rational negation of self-interest; rational self-annihilation; rational self-destruction. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out precisely those truths that are most deadly and destructive to me. To will death through truth and truth through death. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “When all choices are equal, equality is compatible with total randomness. If all choices are equal, then the choice of death is equal to the choice of life. If life is meaningless, then God _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- is nothing. But a funny thing happened on the way to nihilistic self-destruction. It was precisely through radical disbelief that I discovered an evolutionary basis for God. Most secular people in the West are simply not ruthless enough in their nihilism to vivisect belief to death. Yet vivisecting belief to death exposes how the original monotheistic conception of God likely arose out of ruthless realism. Monotheism may have originated out of a skeptical, nihilistic, materialistic _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Perhaps the whole experiment in nihilism is a failure simply because I somehow managed to make it too meaningful. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Nihilism turns out to be more paradoxical than I first thought. The Singularity does not refute nihilism, but rather, “God _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Psychological explanations can be used, not only to evade the nihilistic, but to evade the scientific equation of the larger material world with a material view of one’s own mind — and thus to misunderstand the problem. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “When I say that I do not believe in my emotions, I don’t meant that I don’t have them; I mean that I do not accord them any ultimate meaning or significance. Darwin’s The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals demonstrates why: emotions and instincts are the product of _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- experiment in nihilism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “The experiment in nihilism is a test of what I really do or do not believe. If it is the case that emotions are former genetic adaptations or illusions of an evolutionary inheritance, the chance products of a particular course of natural selection, then there is no reason to assume that they _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- alternatives, then all choices are equal and there is no fundamental ground for choosing life over death.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Liberals are not at all fully nihilistic. In part, there is the practical belief in values vaguely corresponding to human rights. But more fundamentally, “secularists _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- believe in a religion of the common emotions. They generally believe that meaning is to be found in the material, biochemical processes that humans experience as emotions.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For some, the meaninglessness gleaned from a scientific view of life leads to nausea, angst, and nihilistic despair. I reject this attitude on the grounds that nausea, angst, and nihilistic despair also originate in material reactions in the brain. What does despair mean to someone who interprets that emotion as a chemical reaction in the brain? The process of disillusionment can also be disillusioned and de-aestheticized. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “What is closest to total indifference is to be dead. If an observer hypothesizes death then, from that perspective, the observer has no vested interests in life and thus possible grounds for _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- the most objective view. The more an observer is reduced to nothing, the more the observer is no longer a factor, the more the observer might set the conditions for the most rigorous objectivity.” (selflessness) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is likely that most people will not even consider the veracity of this correlation between death and objectivity even if they understand it intellectually because most will consciously or unconsciously choose to place the interests of self-preservation over the interests of objectivity. In other words, to even consider the validity of this view assumes that one is willing and able to even consider prioritizing objectivity over one’s own self-preservation. Since it not safe to simply assume this on an individual level, let alone a social level, relatively few are willing and able to seriously address this issue (and majority consensus can be expected to dismiss the issue). In short, for most people, including most “scientists _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “By simply changing my values from life values to death values, and setting my trajectory for rational biological self-destruction, I am able to liberate myself from many of the biases that _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- My objective is to kill myself. Now how can I explain this? If reason cannot determine ultimate values, then how do I explain the facts of my values? I can begin to explain myself through the Nietzschean distinction between truth and life. It is a modern delusion to believe that pursuit of truth has any necessary correspondence with life-affirming values. To not gloss over the forks between these paths with myths and compromises, but to confront them openly, directly, and as far as possible, without illusion, can lead to the path of truth and death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “The attempt to fully include one’s self in one’s own theory can never, it seems, be achieved. However, the attempt to approach this state amounts to a process of rational self-destruction because, in order to approach objectivity, the elimination of subjectivity must proceed, and the elimination of all self-interest approaches the elimination of biases of life over death. Rational self-destruction that culminates in death is correlated with the most thorough attempt at _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- is nothing. An experiment in nihilism, I am destroying all values that uphold life until I am left with nowhere to stand.” (this is renunciation, this is what I am doing) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “When all choices are equal, equality is compatible with total randomness. If all choices are equal, then the choice of death is equal to the choice of life. If life is meaningless, then God is nothing. (this is above, but important enough to stand out as a repeat) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Disillusioned of belief in my own subjective experiences, at rock bottom, I turned to completely destroy myself. If life itself is without ultimate meaning, and is not fundamentally _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- rationally superior to death, then perhaps the test of the worth of life is found in willing death and self-destruction.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- of my point of view. Psychological explanations can be used, not only to evade the nihilistic, but to evade the scientific equation of the larger material world with a material view of one’s own mind — and thus to misunderstand the problem.” (the idea of 'mental illness' not being what it is normally defined as. Tillich makes this distinction, as does Becker, e.g. what could psychotherapy possibly say to the Nihilist? Nihilism is seeing the world correctly, happiness is for the pigs, Zapffe all say this) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The most consistent physicalism, a physicalism that makes no exceptions whatsoever for subjective experiences such as instincts, intuitions, and emotions, leads to rational self-destruction or rational death. Self-consistent materialism leads to interpreting every subjective experience, i.e. fear, love, inspiration, dreams, etc., as physical matter. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- nihilism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- take their starting point with a bias towards existence, to criticize this bias is to take a starting that is open to the possibility of death.” (Amery) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- meaningless. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out and expose every illusion and every myth, wherever it may lead, no matter what, even if it kills us.” _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Nihilism, noted Friedrich Nietzsche, “represents the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and ideals _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
## Teleological Paradox
- “The following is an experiment in nihilism. Already I have contradicted myself! How can one believe in disbelief? I might be a nihilist except that I don’t believe in anything. If there is no extant God and no extant gods, no good and no evil, no right and no wrong, no meaning and no purpose; if there are no values that are inherently valuable; no justice that is ultimately justifiable; no reasoning that is fundamentally rational, then there is no sane way to choose _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “If no values are inherently valuable, then life has no inherent value. If life has no inherent purpose, then its end could be directed towards its negation or death. Death could be posited as the highest value. Since the other secular values are premised upon life, death is the test of all the _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The implications of life’s meaninglessness have not been elicited with sufficient ruthlessness. My methodology is honesty to the point of absurdity; honesty without mercy; honesty unprejudiced by morals, aesthetics, faith, or hope. When all illusions have been dispelled, at the end of overcoming subjectivities, biases, and prejudices towards life, one encounters the possibility of rational negation of self-interest; rational self-annihilation; rational self-destruction. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out precisely those truths that are most deadly and destructive to me. To will death through truth and truth through death. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “When I say that I do not believe in my emotions, I don’t meant that I don’t have them; I mean that I do not accord them any ultimate meaning or significance. Darwin’s The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals demonstrates why: emotions and instincts are the product of _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_