# Paul Tillich — Universal Nihilism Markmap
## (Unclassified)
- Faith is the state of being ultimately concerned. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- They state unambiguously the character of genuine faith, the demand of total surrender to the subject of ultimate concern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “Faith is not an act of any of his rational functions, as it is not an act of the unconscious, but it is an act in which both the rational and the nonrational elements of his being are transcended...It transcends them, but it does not destroy them. (Otto) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The reality of man's ultimate concern reveals something about his being, namely, that he is able to transcend the flux of relative and transitory experiences of his ordinary life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man's experiences feelings, thoughts are conditioned and finite. They not only come and go, but their content is of finite and conditional concern... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man is driven towards faith by his awareness of the infinite. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...is the passion for the infinite. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the ultimate is concern about what is experienced as ultimate. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...a critical principle was and is at work in man's religious consciousness, namely, that which is really ultimate over against what claims to be ultimate but is only preliminary, transitory, finite. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is no faith without a content toward which it is directed. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In true faith the ultimate concern is a concern about the truly ultimate; while in idolatrous faith preliminary, finite realities are elevated to the rank of ultimacy. The inescapable consequence of idolatrous faith is 'existential disappointment,' a disappointment which penetrates into the very existence of man! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...even an idolatrous faith can hide this consequence only for a certain time. But finally it breaks into the open. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The awareness of the holy is awareness of the presence of the divine, namely of the content of our ultimate concern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is a presence that remains mysterious in spite of its appearance, and it exercises both an attractive and a repulsive function of those who encounter it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The human heart seeks the infinite because that is where the finite wants to rest. In the infinite it sees its own fulfillment. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the infinite distance of the finite from the infinite and, consequently, the negative judgment over any finite attempts to reach the infinite. The feeling of being consumed in the presence of the divine is a profound expression of man's relation to the holy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the holy has been called the 'entirely other'... _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The holy transcends this realm; this is its mystery and its unapproachable character. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...there is no way of reaching the infinite. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The holy can appear as creative and as destructive. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the terrifying and consuming element can be destructive and creative. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The holy which is demonic, or ultimately destructive, is indentical wit hthe content of idolatrous faith. Idolatrous faith is still faith. The holy which is demonic is still holy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the danger of faith is idolatry... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Our ultimate concern can destroy us as it can heal us. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- An act of faith is an act of a finite being who is grasped by and turned to the infinite. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Faith is certain in so far as it is an experience of the holy. But faith is uncertain in so far as the infinite to which it is related is received by the finite being. This element of uncertainty in faith cannot be removed, it must be accepted. And the element in faith which accepts this is courage. Faith includes an element of immediate awareness which gives certainty and an element of uncertainty. To accept this is courage. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Courage as an element of faith is the daring self-affirmation of one's own being in spite of the power of 'nonbeing' which are the heritage of everything finite. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A god disappears; divinity remains. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In any case, he who denies God as a matter of ultimate concern affirms God, because he affirms ultimacy in his concern. God is the fundamental symbol for what concern us ultimately. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Holy things are not holy in themselves, but they point, beyond themselves to the source of all holiness, that which is of ultimate concern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Those who live in an unbroken mythological world feel safe and certain. They resist, often fanatically, any attempt to introduce an element of uncertainty by 'breaking the myth,' namely, by making conscious its symbolic character. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The resistance against demythologization expresses itself in literalism...The character of the symbol to point beyond itself to something else is disregarded...The fall of Adam is localized on a special geographical point and attributed to a human individual. The virgin birth of the Messiah is understood in biological terms, ressurection and ascension as physical events...The presupposition of such literalism is that God is a being, acting in time and space, dwelling in a special place... _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Faith, if it takes its symbolism literally, becomes idolatrous! It calls something ultimate that is less than ultimate. Faith, conscious of the symbolic character of its symbols, gives God the honor which is due to him. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- It grasps the mind with terrifying and fascinating power. It breaks into the ordinary reality, shakes it and drives it beyond itself in an ecstatic way. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man's faith is inadequate if his whole existence is determined by something that is less than ultimate. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...to face ones's own relativity one the greatness and danger... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the infinite tension between the absoluteness of its claim and the relativity of its life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- They produce awe, fascination, adoration, idolatrous distortion, criticism, replacement by other bearers of the holy. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- It is the state of being grasped by the holy through a special medium. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is no criterion by which faith can be judged from outside the correlation of faith. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The faithful can ask himself or be asked by someone else whether the medium through which he experiences ultimate concern expresses real ultimacy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the inadequacy of the finite...The human mind, however, forgets this inadequacy and identifies the sacred object with the ultimate itself. The sacramental object is taken as holy in itself. Its character as the bearer of the holy, pointing beyond itself, disappears in the act of faith. The act of faith is no longer directed toward the ultimate self, but toward that which represents the ultimate- the tree, the book, the building, the person. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Mysticism is not irrational. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- How is such an experience possible if the ultimate is that which transcends all possible experience? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The mystic is aware of the infinite distance between the infinite and the finite, and accepts a life of preliminary stages of union with the infinite, interrupted only rarely, and perhaps never, in this life by the final ecstasy. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The question of faith is not Moses or Jesus or Mohammed; the question is: Who expresses most adequately one's ultimate concern? The conflict between religions is not a conflict between forms of belief, but it is a conflict between expressions of our ultimate concern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The ultimate shall always be present and remembered even in the smallest activities of the ordinary life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Faith, in the New Testament, is the state of being grasped by the divine Spirit. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Man's reason is finite; it moves within finite relations when dealing with the universe and with man himself. All cultural activities in which he shapes his world have this character of finitude. Therefore, they are not matters of ultimate concern. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Man experiences a belonging to the infinite, which, however, is neither a part of himself nor something in his power. It must grasp him, and if it does, it is a matter of infinite concern. Man is finite, man's reason lives in preliminary concerns; but man is also aware of his potential infinity, and this awareness appears as his ultimate concern. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Reason can be fulfilled only if it is driven beyond the limits of its finitude, and experiences the presence of the ultimate, the holy. Without such an experience, reason exhausts itself and its finite content. Finally, it becomes filled with irrational or demonic contents and is destroyed by them. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- First, it must be acknowledged that man is in a state of estrangement from his true nature. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- on being 'grasped'- “Without some participation in the object of one's ultimate concern, it is not possible to be concerned about it. In this sense ebvery act of faith presupposes participation in that toward which it is directed. Without a preceding experience of the ultimate no faith in the ultimate can exist. The mystical type of faith has emphasized this the most strongly." _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Without hte manifestation of God in man the question of God and faith in God are not possible. There is no faith without participation! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We are never able to bridge the infinite distance between the infinite and the finite from the side of the finite. This alone makes the courage of faith possible. The risk of failure, of error and of idolatrous distortion can be taken, because the failure cannot separate us from what is our ultimate concern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The ultimate concern gives depth, direction and unity to all other concerns and, with them, to the whole personality. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Ultimate concern is passionate concern; it is a matter of infinite passion. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The body can participate both in vital ecstasy and in asceticism leading to spiritual ecstasy. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The objects of modern secular idolatry, such as nation and success, have shown healing power, not only by the magic fascination of a leader, a slogan or a promise but also by the fulfillment of otherwise unfulfilled strivings for a meaningful life. But the basis for integration is too narrow. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- One is ultimately concerned only about something to which one essentially belongs and from which one is existentially separated. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- That which is based on an ultimate concern is not exposed to destruction by preliminary concerns and the lack of their fulfillment. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Without symbols in which the holy is experienced as present, the experience of the holy vanishes. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- If the myth is understood literally, philosophy must reject it as absurd. It must demythologize the sacred stories, transform the myth into a philosophy of religion and finally into a philosophy without religion. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- ...no one is completely without an ultimate concern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Faith is a concept- and a reality- which is difficult to grasp and to describe. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
## Epistemological Rupture
- ...the concept of the holy was changed. Holiness becomes justice and truth. It is creative and not destructive. The true sacrafice is obedience to the law. This is the line of thought which finally led to the identification of holiness with moral perfection. But when this point is reached, holiness loses its meaning as the 'sperated', the 'transcending', the 'fascinating and terrifying', the 'entirely other'. All this is gone, and the holy has become the morally good and the logically true. It has ceased to be the holy in the genuine sense of the word. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The is a risk if what was considered as a matter of ultimate concern proves to be a matter or preliminary and transitory concern- as, for example, the nation. The risk to faith in one's ultimate concern is indeed the greatest risk a man can run. For if it proves to be a failure, the meaning of one's life breaks down; one surrenders oneself, including truth and justice, to something which is not worth it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- If faith is understood as belief that something is true, doubt is incompatible with the act of faith. If faith is understood as being ultimately concerned, doubt is a necessary element in it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The skeptical doubt is an attitude towards all beliefs of man, from sense experiences to religious creeds. It is more an attitude than an assertion. For as an assertion it would conflict with itself. Even the assertion that there is no possible truth for man would be judged by the skeptical principle and could not stand as an assertion. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Genuine skeptical doubt does not use the form of an assertion. It is an attitude of actually rejecting any certainty. There, it cannot be refuted logically. It does not transform its attitude into a proposition. Such an attitude necessarily leads to either despair or cynicism, or to both alternately. And often, if this alternative becomes intolerable, it leads to indifference and the attempt to develop an attitude of complete unconcern...such an escape finally breaks down. This is the dynamics of skeptical doubt. It has an awakening and liberating function... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The despair about truth by the skeptic shows that truth is still his infinite passion. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The cynical superiority over every concrete truth shows that truth is still taken seriously and that the impact of the question of an ultimate concern is strongly felt. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the doubt of him who is ultimately concerned about a concrete content. One could call it existential doubt, in contrast to the methodological and the skeptical doubt. It does not question whether a special proposition is true or false. It does not reject every concrete truth, but it is aware of the element of insecurity in every existential truth. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- But the underlying structure of finite life is the universal condition which makes the appearance of anxiety under special conditions possible. In the same what doubt is not a permanent experience with the act of faith. But it is always present as an element in the structure of faith. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Many Christians, as well as other religious groups, feel anxiety, guilt and despair about what they call 'loss of faith.' But serious doubt is confirmation of faith. It indicates the seriousness of the concern, its unconditional character. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- How can a faith which has doubt as an element within itself be united with creedal statements of the community of faith? The answer can only be that creedal expressions of the ultimate concern of the community must include their own criticism. It must become obvious to them- be they liturgical, doctrinal or ethical expressions of the faith of the community- that they are not ultimate. Rather, their function is to point to the ultimate which is beyond all of them. This is what I call the 'Protestant principle.' _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As a theoretical judgement claiming general validity, it is a meaningless combination of words. But in the correlation between the subject and the author of faith, it has meaning and truth. The outside observer can only state that there is a correlation of faith between the one who has faith and the sacramental object of his faith. But he cannot deny or affirm the validity of this correlation of faith. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- A faith which destroys reason destroys itself and the humanity of man. For only a being who has the structure of reason is able to be ultimately concerned, to distinguish ultimate and preliminary concerns, to understand the unconditional commands of the ethical imperative, and to be aware of the presence of the holy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The criterion of the truth of faith, therefore, is that it implies an element of self-negation. That symbol is most adequate which expresses not only the ultimate but also it own lack of ultimacy. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The criterion contains a Yes- it does not reject any truth of faith in whatever form it may appear in the history of faith- and it contains a No- it does not accept any truth of faith as ultimate except the one that no man posses it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Out of the element of participation follows the certainty of faith; out of the element of separation follows the doubt in faith. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Sometimes doubt conquers faith, but it still contains faith. Otherwise it would be indifference. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Since the life of faith is life in the state of ultimate concern and no human being can exist completely without such a concern, we can say: Neither faith nor doubt can be eliminated from man as man. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- In the mystical literature the 'vision of God is...In the complete reunion with the divine ground of being, the element of distance is overcome and with it uncertainty, doubt, courage and risk. The finite is taken into the infinite; it is not extinguished, but it is not separated either. This is not the ordinary human condition. To the state of separated finitude belong faith and the courage to risk. The risk of faith is the concrete content of one's ultimate concern. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Spiritual creativity shows an increasingly shallow and empty character, because no infinite meaning gives depth to it. The passion of faith is transformed into the suffering of unconquered doubt and despair, and in many cases into an escape to neurosis and psychosis. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
## Ethical Collapse
- “'Holy' has become identified with moral perfection...Originally, the holy has meant what is apart from the ordinary realm of things and experiences. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the concept of the holy was changed. Holiness becomes justice and truth. It is creative and not destructive. The true sacrafice is obedience to the law. This is the line of thought which finally led to the identification of holiness with moral perfection. But when this point is reached, holiness loses its meaning as the 'sperated', the 'transcending', the 'fascinating and terrifying', the 'entirely other'. All this is gone, and the holy has become the morally good and the logically true. It has ceased to be the holy in the genuine sense of the word. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...one could say that the holy originally lies below the alternative of the good and evil; that it is both divine and demonic... _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The is a risk if what was considered as a matter of ultimate concern proves to be a matter or preliminary and transitory concern- as, for example, the nation. The risk to faith in one's ultimate concern is indeed the greatest risk a man can run. For if it proves to be a failure, the meaning of one's life breaks down; one surrenders oneself, including truth and justice, to something which is not worth it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- How can a faith which has doubt as an element within itself be united with creedal statements of the community of faith? The answer can only be that creedal expressions of the ultimate concern of the community must include their own criticism. It must become obvious to them- be they liturgical, doctrinal or ethical expressions of the faith of the community- that they are not ultimate. Rather, their function is to point to the ultimate which is beyond all of them. This is what I call the 'Protestant principle.' _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- All the qualities we attribute to him, power, love, justice, are taken from finite experiences and applied symbolically to that which is beyond finitude and infinity. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- A faith which destroys reason destroys itself and the humanity of man. For only a being who has the structure of reason is able to be ultimately concerned, to distinguish ultimate and preliminary concerns, to understand the unconditional commands of the ethical imperative, and to be aware of the presence of the holy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Mystical love unites by negation of the self. Ethical love transforms by affirmation of the self. The sphere of activities following from mystical love is predominantly ascetic. The sphere of activities following from ethical love is predominantly formative _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
## Linguistic Futility
- “'Ecstasy' means standing 'outside of oneself'- without ceasing to be oneself. (One of the Nihilist speaks of the objectivity one gets from Nihilism, I say this in my journals, I just need to find the entry date, also that quote from 'solitude' is exactly this experience. Although all alone, you have a sense of something bigger that is connected with yourself and everyone else, Shrooms, cannabis, entheogens) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- All speaking about divine matters which is not done in the state of ultimate concern is meaningless. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...the concept of the holy was changed. Holiness becomes justice and truth. It is creative and not destructive. The true sacrafice is obedience to the law. This is the line of thought which finally led to the identification of holiness with moral perfection. But when this point is reached, holiness loses its meaning as the 'sperated', the 'transcending', the 'fascinating and terrifying', the 'entirely other'. All this is gone, and the holy has become the morally good and the logically true. It has ceased to be the holy in the genuine sense of the word. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Religiously speaking, God transcends his own name. This is why the use of his name easily becomes an abuse or blasphemy. Whatever we say about that which concerns us ultimately, whether or not we call it God, has a symbolic meaning. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Here again it would be meaningless to ask whether one or another of the figures in which an ultimate concern is symbolized does 'exist.' If 'existence' refers to something which can be foiund withing the whole of reality, no divine being exists. The question is not this, but: which of the numerable symbols of faith is most adequate to the meaning of faith? In other words, which symbol of faith ultimately expresses the ultimate without idolatrous elements? _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Literalism deprives God of his ultimacy and, religiously speaking, of his majesty. It draws him down to the level of that which is not ultimate, the finite and conditional. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- This jar of water, this piece of bread, this cup of wine, this tree, this movement of the hands, of the knees, this building, this river, this color, this word, this book, this person is a bearer of the holy. In them faith experiences the content of its ultimate concern. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As a theoretical judgement claiming general validity, it is a meaningless combination of words. But in the correlation between the subject and the author of faith, it has meaning and truth. The outside observer can only state that there is a correlation of faith between the one who has faith and the sacramental object of his faith. But he cannot deny or affirm the validity of this correlation of faith. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- They indentified the ultimate with the ground or substance of everything- the one, the ineffable, the being above being. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- But they realized that the true content of faith in an ultimate concern can neither be identified with a piece of reality, as sacramental faith desires, nor be expressed in terms of a rational system. It is a matter of ecstatic experience, and one can only speak of the ultimate in a language which at the same times denies the possibility of speaking about it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
## Ontological Abyss
- ...the ultimate concern with 'success' and the social standing and economic power. It is the god of many people in the highly competitive western culture...even if the price is sacrifice of genuine human relations, personal conviction, and creative eros...misplaced faith is...When fulfilled, the promise of this faith proves to be empty. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “'Ecstasy' means standing 'outside of oneself'- without ceasing to be oneself. (One of the Nihilist speaks of the objectivity one gets from Nihilism, I say this in my journals, I just need to find the entry date, also that quote from 'solitude' is exactly this experience. Although all alone, you have a sense of something bigger that is connected with yourself and everyone else, Shrooms, cannabis, entheogens) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- All speaking about divine matters which is not done in the state of ultimate concern is meaningless. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- ...the concept of the holy was changed. Holiness becomes justice and truth. It is creative and not destructive. The true sacrafice is obedience to the law. This is the line of thought which finally led to the identification of holiness with moral perfection. But when this point is reached, holiness loses its meaning as the 'sperated', the 'transcending', the 'fascinating and terrifying', the 'entirely other'. All this is gone, and the holy has become the morally good and the logically true. It has ceased to be the holy in the genuine sense of the word. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The is a risk if what was considered as a matter of ultimate concern proves to be a matter or preliminary and transitory concern- as, for example, the nation. The risk to faith in one's ultimate concern is indeed the greatest risk a man can run. For if it proves to be a failure, the meaning of one's life breaks down; one surrenders oneself, including truth and justice, to something which is not worth it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The reaction of despair in people who have experienced the breakdown of their national claims is an irrefutable proof of the idolatrous character of their national concern. In the long run this is the inescapable result of an ultimate concern, the subject matter of which is not ultimate. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Genuine skeptical doubt does not use the form of an assertion. It is an attitude of actually rejecting any certainty. There, it cannot be refuted logically. It does not transform its attitude into a proposition. Such an attitude necessarily leads to either despair or cynicism, or to both alternately. And often, if this alternative becomes intolerable, it leads to indifference and the attempt to develop an attitude of complete unconcern...such an escape finally breaks down. This is the dynamics of skeptical doubt. It has an awakening and liberating function... _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The despair about truth by the skeptic shows that truth is still his infinite passion. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The description of anxiety as the awareness of one's finitude is sometimes criticized as untrue from the point of view of the ordinary state of mind. Anxiety, one says, appears under special conditions but is not an ever-present implication of man's finitude. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- But the underlying structure of finite life is the universal condition which makes the appearance of anxiety under special conditions possible. In the same what doubt is not a permanent experience with the act of faith. But it is always present as an element in the structure of faith. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Many Christians, as well as other religious groups, feel anxiety, guilt and despair about what they call 'loss of faith.' But serious doubt is confirmation of faith. It indicates the seriousness of the concern, its unconditional character. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Religiously speaking, God transcends his own name. This is why the use of his name easily becomes an abuse or blasphemy. Whatever we say about that which concerns us ultimately, whether or not we call it God, has a symbolic meaning. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Here again it would be meaningless to ask whether one or another of the figures in which an ultimate concern is symbolized does 'exist.' If 'existence' refers to something which can be foiund withing the whole of reality, no divine being exists. The question is not this, but: which of the numerable symbols of faith is most adequate to the meaning of faith? In other words, which symbol of faith ultimately expresses the ultimate without idolatrous elements? _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- As a theoretical judgement claiming general validity, it is a meaningless combination of words. But in the correlation between the subject and the author of faith, it has meaning and truth. The outside observer can only state that there is a correlation of faith between the one who has faith and the sacramental object of his faith. But he cannot deny or affirm the validity of this correlation of faith. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- In order to go into it, man must empty himself of all the finite contents of his ordinary life; he must surrender all preliminary concerns for the sake of the ultimate concern. He must transcend the division of existence...The ultimate is beyond this division, and he who wants to reach the ultimate must overcome this division in himself by meditation, contemplation and ecstasy. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- History has shown this weakness and final emptiness of all merely secular cultures. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The danger of this method, of course, is that the faith, meditated in education, will remain a traditional attitude and never break through to a state of living faith. However, if this causes people to become hesitant about communicating any of the given symbols and to wait until independent questions about the meaning of life have arisen, it can lead to a powerful life of faith, but it also can lead to emptiness, to cynicism and, in reaction to it, to idolatrous forms of ultimate concern. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- It is experienced in passion, anxiety, despair, ecstasy. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Spiritual creativity shows an increasingly shallow and empty character, because no infinite meaning gives depth to it. The passion of faith is transformed into the suffering of unconquered doubt and despair, and in many cases into an escape to neurosis and psychosis. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
## Teleological Paradox
- Religiously speaking, God transcends his own name. This is why the use of his name easily becomes an abuse or blasphemy. Whatever we say about that which concerns us ultimately, whether or not we call it God, has a symbolic meaning. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The danger of this method, of course, is that the faith, meditated in education, will remain a traditional attitude and never break through to a state of living faith. However, if this causes people to become hesitant about communicating any of the given symbols and to wait until independent questions about the meaning of life have arisen, it can lead to a powerful life of faith, but it also can lead to emptiness, to cynicism and, in reaction to it, to idolatrous forms of ultimate concern. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_