# Ethical Collapse — Ernest Becker
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- “We disguise our struggle by piling up figures in a bank book to reflect privately our sense of heroic worth. Or by having only a little better home in the neighborhood, a bigger car, brighter children. But underneath throbs the ache of cosmic specialness, no matter how we mask it in _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- It can’t be overstressed, one final time, that to see the world as it really is is devastating and terrifying...It makes thoughtless living in the world of men an impossibility. It places a trembling animal at the mercy of the entire cosmos and the problem of the meaning of it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- When^you narrow your meanings down to this world, you are still looking for the absolute, for the supreme self-transcending power, mystery, and majesty. Only now you must find it in the things of this world.” (Tillich, Vivekananda, Ha- good luck) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The great lesson of Rank’s depreciation of sexuality was not that he played down physical love and sensuality, but that he saw—like Augustine and Kierkegaard, that man cannot fashion an absolute from within his condition, that cosmic heroism must transcend human relationships. What is at stake in all this is. of course, the question of freedom, the quality of one’s life and one's individuality. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- good provider _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Do Freud and others imagine that surrender to God is masochistic, that to empty oneself is demeaning? Well, answers Rank, it represents on the contrary the furthest reach of the self, the highest idealization man can achieve. It represents the fulfillment of the Agape love-expansion, the achievement of the truly creative type. Only in this way, says Rank, only by surrendering to the bigness of nature on the highest, least-fetishized level, can man conquer death. In other words, the true heroic validation of one’s life lies beyond sex, beyond the other, beyond the private religion—all these are makeshifts that pull man down or that hem him in, leaving him torn with ambiguity. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Neurosis is, then, something we all share; it is universal. Or, putting it another way, nonfiaTi^is neurosis, and vice versa. We call a man “neurotic _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- not only outer illusions such as art, religion, philosophy, science and love afford, but inner illusions which first condition the outer.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- special wondrousness they felt as good as dead. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We can conclude with Rank that religion is “just as good a psychology _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Here Rank and Kierkegaard meet in one of those astonishing historical mergers of thought: that sin and neurosis are two ways of talking about the same thing—the complete isolation of the individual, his disharmony with the rest of nature, his hyperindividualism, his attempt to create his own world from within himself. Both sin and neurosis represent the individual blowing himself up to larger than his true size, his refusal to recognize his cosmic dependence. Neurosis, like sin, is an attempt to force nature, to pretend that the causa-sui project really suffices. In sin and neurosis man fetishizes himself on something narrow at hand and pretends that the whole meaning and miraculousness of creation is limited to that, that he can get his beatification. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- of the symbolic world-view, the God-ideology that would make sense out of his unworthiness and would translate it into heroism. Traditional religion turned the consciousness of sin into a condition _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- This is Rank’s devastating Kierkegaardian conclusion: if neurosis is sin, and not disease, then the only thing which can “cure _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Boss says that the terrible guilt feelings of the depressed person are existential, that is, they represent the failure to live one’s own life, to fulfill one’s own potential because of the twisting and turning to be “good _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “When we are young we are often puzzled by the fact that each person we admire seems to have a different version of what life ought to be, what a good man is, how to live, and so on. If we are _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- especially sensitive it seems more than puzzling, it is disheartening.” (this is the absurd perspective, the problem of relativism/nihilism that is not seen by every one because they have been raised within the relativistic/nihilistic framework, nothing weird about everyone having a different opinion/not being able to find out who's right, if anyone is, and yet not figuring out that all your moral/important demands and judgments are just as nonsensical as the person that you oppose, since there is no way to find out who is right, how come everyone doesn't find this weird?) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- I have found little that is "good _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And then the real tragedy, as Andre Malraux wrote in The Human Condition: that it takes sixty years of incredible suffering and effort to make such an individual and then he is good only for dying. This painful paradox is not lost on the person himself least of all himself. He feels agonizingly unique, and yet he knows that this doesn’t make any difference as far as ultimates are concerned. He has to go the way of the grasshopper, even though it takes longer. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Oedipus complex, as Freud so well knew, or because one can make love with tenderness, as so many now believe. Forget it. In this sense again it is Freuds somber pessimism, especially of his later writings such as Civilization and Its Discontents, that keeps him so contemporary. Men are doomed to live in an overwhelmingly tragic and demonic world.” (Zapffe and 'Happiness is for the pigs') _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_