# Ethical Collapse — Paul Tillich
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- “'Holy' has become identified with moral perfection...Originally, the holy has meant what is apart from the ordinary realm of things and experiences. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the concept of the holy was changed. Holiness becomes justice and truth. It is creative and not destructive. The true sacrafice is obedience to the law. This is the line of thought which finally led to the identification of holiness with moral perfection. But when this point is reached, holiness loses its meaning as the 'sperated', the 'transcending', the 'fascinating and terrifying', the 'entirely other'. All this is gone, and the holy has become the morally good and the logically true. It has ceased to be the holy in the genuine sense of the word. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...one could say that the holy originally lies below the alternative of the good and evil; that it is both divine and demonic... _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The is a risk if what was considered as a matter of ultimate concern proves to be a matter or preliminary and transitory concern- as, for example, the nation. The risk to faith in one's ultimate concern is indeed the greatest risk a man can run. For if it proves to be a failure, the meaning of one's life breaks down; one surrenders oneself, including truth and justice, to something which is not worth it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- How can a faith which has doubt as an element within itself be united with creedal statements of the community of faith? The answer can only be that creedal expressions of the ultimate concern of the community must include their own criticism. It must become obvious to them- be they liturgical, doctrinal or ethical expressions of the faith of the community- that they are not ultimate. Rather, their function is to point to the ultimate which is beyond all of them. This is what I call the 'Protestant principle.' _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- All the qualities we attribute to him, power, love, justice, are taken from finite experiences and applied symbolically to that which is beyond finitude and infinity. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- A faith which destroys reason destroys itself and the humanity of man. For only a being who has the structure of reason is able to be ultimately concerned, to distinguish ultimate and preliminary concerns, to understand the unconditional commands of the ethical imperative, and to be aware of the presence of the holy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Mystical love unites by negation of the self. Ethical love transforms by affirmation of the self. The sphere of activities following from mystical love is predominantly ascetic. The sphere of activities following from ethical love is predominantly formative _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_