# Ethical Collapse — Emile Cioran
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- inner being reaches paroxysm. thus people who are normally inclined toward objectivity and impersonality, strangers both to themselves and to reality, once they become prisoners of love, experience feelings which actualize all their personal resources. the fact that almost everybody writes poetry when in love proves that the resources of conceptual thinking are too poor to _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- “the passion for the absurd. there are no arguments. Can anyone who has reached the limit bother with arguments, causes, effects, moral considerations, and so forth? of course not. for _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- such a person there are only unmotivated motives for living. on the heights of despair, the passion for the absurd is the only thing that can still throw a demonic light on chaos. When all the current reasons- moral, esthetic, religious, social, and so on - no longer guide one's life, how can one sustain life without succumbing to nothingness? Only by a connection with the absurd, by love of absolute uselessness, loving something which does not have substance but which simulates an illusion of life.” (sounds like Tillich's concrete religious symbols) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- i feel that i am dying of solitude, of love, of despair, of hatred, of all that this world offers me. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “what else in life could still move such a person? what seductions? some say: self-sacrifice for humanity, the public good, the cult of the beautiful, and so forth. i like only those people who have done away with all that - even for a short time. only they have lived in an absolute _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- how good it would be if one could die by throwing oneself into an infinite void! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- only those who truly suffer are capable of of genuine content and infinite seriousness...there are many who would gladly give up metaphysical revelations, obtained through despair, agony, and death, in exchange for a naive love or the voluptuous unconsciousness of dance. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- inner temperatures. nobody who does not love chaos is a creator, and whoever is contemptuous of illness must not speak of the spirit.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- love. its grandeur and infinity impress me, but my despair is so vast that i don't even harbor the hope of death. how could i love death? one can only write about it in contradictory ways. whoever says that he knows something definite about death shows that he has not even a _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- what should i do? work for a social and political system, make a girl miserable? hunt for weaknesses in philosophical systems, fight for moral and esthetic ideals? it's all too little. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- how i would love one day to see all people, young and old, sad or happy, men and women, married or not, serious or superficial leave their homes and their work places, relinquish their duties and responsibilities, gather in the streets and refuse to do anything anymore. at that moment, let slaves to senseless work, who have been toiling for future generations under the dire delusion that they contribute to the good of humanity, avenge themselves on the mediocrity of a sterile and insignificant life, on the tremendous waste that never permitted spiritual transfiguration. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “even today nobody can tell what is right or what is wrong...since reality is essentially irrational, why set rules, why distinguish the right from the wrong? morality cannot be saved; it's a mistake to believe otherwise. yet there are those who maintain that in this world pleasure and sin are minor satisfactions which enjoy only a brief triumph and that only good deeds partake of _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- eternity. they pretend that at the end of this world's misery, goodness and virtue will win but they have failed to see that, if eternity obliterates superficial pleasures, it does the same with virtue, good deeds, and moral actions. eternity does not lead to the triumph of either good or evil; it ravages all.” (me- Exactly! Ha! Vivekananda- maya, Tillich- doubt as being an intrinsic part of true faith, Kierkegaard and how the infinite scared him, how St. Therese said that thoughts concerning the Infinite brought on even deeper anguish) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- cannot solve anything, because nothing satisfies him. you will find in him neither the enthusiast's gift of abandon, his naive irrationality, nor the charming paradox of love in its purest state.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the biblical myth of knowledge as sin is the most profound myth ever invented. the enthusiast's euphoria is due to the fact that he is unaware of the tragedy of knowledge. why not say it? true knowledge is the most tenebrous darkness. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- i have always wondered why those who have produced masterpieces in these domains have not all gone mad. music more than any other art requires so much concentration that one could easily, after creative moments, lose one's mind. all great composers ought to either commit suicide or become insane at the height of their creative powers. are not all those aspiring to infinity on the road to madness? normality, abnormality, are notions that no longer mean anything. let us live in the ecstasy of infinity, let us love that which is boundless, let us destroy forms... _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “sadness, the inebriation and excitement of last moments. is not everything final? what is the anxiety of nothingness if not the perverse joy of our final sadness, our exalted love for the eternity of nothingness and the transience of existence? can it really be that for us existence means exile, and nothingness, home? i must struggle against myself, fly into a rage at my destiny, blow up all _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- To speak of suffering as the path to love means to know nothing of suffering's satanic essence. you don't climb up the steps of suffering; you climb down. they do not lead to heaven but to hell. the darkness at the bottom of the ladder of suffering is less eternal or infinite than the blinding light at the top of the ladder of joy. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- for those deprived of faith, an excess of subjectivity leads either to megalomania or self-denigration, to too much love or too much self-hatred. Either way, you spend yourself ahead of time. subjectivity makes you either god or satan. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- in one's joy? What does it matter whether our tears come from pleasure or pain? love your unhappiness and hate your happiness, mix everything up, scramble it all! be a snowflake dancing _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “could morality still serve such a being- probably the most generous because also the most absurd, capable of renouncing the whole world, and consequently giving away all that can be _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- given? generosity is incompatible with morality, that rationalization of customs, that mechanization of life. Any generous act is absurd, a renunciation unheard of in the _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- ordinary man, who drapes himself in morality in order to hide his vulgar nullity. all that is truly moral begins when we have done with morality. the pettiness of its laws is never more evident than in its condemnation of vice, the expression of carnal tragedy born from the presence of the spirit in the flesh. vice is the tragedy of the flesh, the flesh bursting out of its own fatality, attempting to break the shackles imprisoning its passionate impulses.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To escape our fate— what is the good of striving for that? Not that we must despair of finding a substitute ending. Yet it must be a likely one, one that has some chance of being realized. Man being what he is, can we admit that he might be granted the opportunity of subsiding in the peace of decay, amid the benefits of decrepitude? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Since in us has awakened the evil that slumbered in the remainder of the living, it remains for us to destroy ourselves so that they might be saved. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- At the climax of our Void, we will be doomed, then, to the indignity of a complete erosion, worse than a sudden catastrophe which would be honorable after all, even glamorous. Let us be confident, let us put our bets on catastrophe, more in accord with our genius and our tastes. Let us take one step further, let us suppose it to be upon us, let us treat it as a fail accompli. According to all appearances, it will include certain survivors, a few lucky ones who will have had the good fortune to contemplate its occurrence and to draw lessons from it. Their first concern will certainly be to abolish the memory of the old humanity, of all the enterprises that have discredited and destroyed it. Turning against the cities, they will seek to complete their ruin, to erase all traces of them. One rachitic tree will be worth more in their eyes than a museum or a temple. No more schools; on the other hand, courses in oblivion and unlearning to celebrate the virtues of inattention and the delights of amnesia. The disgust inspired by the sight of any book, frivolous or serious, will extend to all Knowledge, which will be referred to with embarrassment or dread as if it were an obscenity or a scourge. To bother with philosophy, to elaborate a system, to attach oneself to it and believe in it, will appear as an impiety, a provocation, and a betrayal, a criminal complicity with the past. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- I have less and less discernment as to what is good and what evil. When I make no distinction whatever between the two, supposing I reach this point some day— what a step forward! Toward what? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To try curing someone of a “vice, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Life is more and less than boredom, though it is in boredom and by boredom that we discern what life is worth. Once boredom insinuates itself into you, once you fall under its invisible hegemony, everything else seems insignificant. The same might be said of suffering. Yes, indeed. But suffering is localized, whereas boredom evokes an evil without site or support, only that indefinable nothing that erodes you . . . A pure erosion, whose imperceptible effect slowly transforms you into a ruin unnoticed by others and almost unnoticed by yourself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To die at sixty or at eighty is harder than at ten or at thirty. Habituation to life, there’s the rub. For life is a vice— the greatest one of all. Which explains why we have so much difficulty ridding ourselves of it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Of two enemies at odds, it is unlikely that only one should be in the right. When we listen to them one after the other, we yield, if we are in good faith, to the arguments of each, at the risk of looking like a weathercock, of being, in short, too much of a philosopher. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- What is evil? It is what is done with a view to happiness in this world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Saintliness is a negative sort of perfection...There are illnesses that can only be treated with a good dose of divinity, but I prefer the alleviation of pain provided by earthly tranquilizers. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The obsession with God dislodges earthly love. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is so much knowledge in melancholy that we call it a vice. _(REN: (Unassigned))_