# Teleological Paradox — Guilt*
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- The pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood, which is often persistent and which is not to be mistaken for a bad mood, is far from nothing at all. Rather it is in this that Dasein becomes satiated with itself. Being has become manifest as burden (my italics). Why that should be, one does not know. And Dasein cannot know anything of the sort... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- As surely as we never get a sure grasp of the generality of be-ing in itself, just assurely do we all the same find ourselves somehow placed in the midst of the generality of bare be-ing. In the end, there continues to be \(besteht\)an essential difference between getting a grasp of the whole of be-ing in itself and finding oneself in the midst of be-ing as a whole. The former is impossible in principle. The latter happens all the time in our existence. Of course, it looks just as though in our everyday comings and goings we were holding fast to only just this or that \(kind of\) be-ing, as though we were lost in this or that realm of be-ing. But no matter how fragmented the daily round may seem, it always maintains be-ing in the unity of a "whole," although only in the shadows. Even then and precisely just then, when we are not especially busy with things, this "as a whole" overcomes us; for example, in genuine boredom. This is a long way off far off when this or that book or play, job or leisure activity, is boring. It breaks out when "it's boring." Profound boredom, like a silent fog insinuating itself in the depths of existence, pulls things, others and oneself into it altogether with remarkable indifference. Such boredom reveals be-ing as a whole. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Only because no-thing is manifest at the heart of existence can the full strangeness of being come over us. Only if the strangeness of being impresses us does it waken us and open us up to wonder. Only on the basis of wonder, that is, the manifestness of no-thing, does the "Why?" come up. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Philosophy comes about only through our own life's undergoing a curious engagement with the fundamental possibilities of existence as a whole. Decisive for this engagement is, first of all, making room for be-ing as a whole; next, letting oneself come to no-thing, that is, becoming free of the idols which everyone has and among \(which\) weare in the habit of losing our way; finally, letting this suspense range out into what it permanently swings round to in the basic question of metaphysics which no-thing itself forces on us: Why be-ing, after all, and not rather no-thing? _(REN: (Unassigned))_