# Teleological Paradox — Martin Heidegger
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- **Hope**- is not said to be a hope for a 'future event', but rather it has the deeper significance of discovering your true Self. Heidegger is religious as fuck. “indifference' is not the same as embracing death and existence. end of pg. 395-396- _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- When Dasein is resolute, it takes over authentically in its existence the fact that it is the null basis of its own nullity. We have conceived death existentially as what we have characterized as the possibility of the impossibility of existence- that is to say, as the utter nullity of Dasein. Death is not 'added on' to Dasein at its 'end' but Dasein, as care, is the thrown (that is, null) basis for death. The nullity by which Dasein's Being is dominated primordially through and through, is revealed to Dasein itself in authentic Being-towards-death. Only on the basis of Dasein's whole Being does anticipation make Being-guilty manifest. Care harbours itself in both death and guilt equiprimordially. Only anticipatory resoluteness understands the potentiality-for-Being-guilty authentically and wholly- that is to say, primordially. When the call of conscience is understood, lostness in the 'they' is revealed. Resoluteness brings Dasein back to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-self. When one has an understanding Being-towards-death- towards death as one's ownmost possibility- one's potentiality-for-Being becomes authentic and wholly transparent. The call of conscience passes over in its appeal all Dasein's 'worldly' prestige and potentialities. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- has not only an amazing description of the Nihilistic experience, but also a great explanation for why the atheists and theists of today 'misinterpret' this experience; mainly due to no one wanting to be Authentic, i.e. not wanting any conflict with anxiety, never mind a true attempt at embracing/confronting anxiety; put in stronger terms: a chasing after the anxiety, i.e. a participation with the Other, with the Nothingness of this world. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_