# Teleological Paradox — Emile Cioran
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- “only a few can endure such experiences to the end. there is always a serious danger in repressing something which requires objectification, in locking up explosive energy, because there comes a moment when one can not restrain such overwhelming power. and then the fall is from too much plenitude. there are experiences and obsessions one cannot live with. salvation lies in confessing them. the terrifying experience of death, when preserved in consciousness, becomes _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “how distant everything is! i don't understand why we must do things in this world, why we _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- in death one loses everything, by a fall into nothingness. that is why the fear of death is persistent and essential, but actually less strange than the fear of madness, in which our semi-presence creates an anxiety more complex than the organic fear of the total nothingness of death. but wouldn't madness be an escape from the misery of life? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- whoever has not experienced the awful agony of death, rising and spreading like a surge of blood, like the choking grasp of a snake which provokes terrifying hallucinations, does not know the demonic character of life and the state of inner effervescence from which great transfigurations arise. such a state of black drunkenness is a necessary prerequisite to understanding why one wishes the immediate end of this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- one kind of agony, the one immediately preceding the fall into absolute nothingness. only such moments of agony bring about important existential revelations in consciousness. that is why they expect everything from the end instead of trying to grasp the meaning of a slow revelatory agony. the end will reveal too little, and they will die as ignorant as they have lived.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- not everybody loses their innocence: therefore not everybody is unhappy...disintegration implies total loss of innocence, that lovely gift destroyed by knowledge, life's enemy. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- “spirit in life is an anomaly. i have renounced so much, why should i not renounce spirit as well? but besides being an illness of life, is not renunciation first and foremost an illness of _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “even today nobody can tell what is right or what is wrong...since reality is essentially irrational, why set rules, why distinguish the right from the wrong? morality cannot be saved; it's a mistake to believe otherwise. yet there are those who maintain that in this world pleasure and sin are minor satisfactions which enjoy only a brief triumph and that only good deeds partake of _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- eternity. they pretend that at the end of this world's misery, goodness and virtue will win but they have failed to see that, if eternity obliterates superficial pleasures, it does the same with virtue, good deeds, and moral actions. eternity does not lead to the triumph of either good or evil; it ravages all.” (me- Exactly! Ha! Vivekananda- maya, Tillich- doubt as being an intrinsic part of true faith, Kierkegaard and how the infinite scared him, how St. Therese said that thoughts concerning the Infinite brought on even deeper anguish) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- time with its long train of individual moments is, if not unreal, irrelevant...without temporality, life loses its dramatic character...the experience of the eternity is void of life. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “why should i live in history, or worry about the social and cultural problems of the age? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- let us live the agony fully; let us live our inner tragedy absolutely and frenetically to the very end. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the biblical myth of knowledge as sin is the most profound myth ever invented. the enthusiast's euphoria is due to the fact that he is unaware of the tragedy of knowledge. why not say it? true knowledge is the most tenebrous darkness. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- it is hard to explain how this selection and purification takes place, why these immaterial shadows hold such sway over us. how can we help attributing an absolute character to light and darkness when they are all that is left of the world's ecstasy? the frequency with which ecstasy occurs in oriental religions, as well as in other forms of mysticism at all times, proves the rightness of our hypothesis. the absolute is inside oneself, not outside, and ecstasy, this paroxysm _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- our regression, clear points of reference, where history moves toward a goal envisioned _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- i have always wondered why those who have produced masterpieces in these domains have not all gone mad. music more than any other art requires so much concentration that one could easily, after creative moments, lose one's mind. all great composers ought to either commit suicide or become insane at the height of their creative powers. are not all those aspiring to infinity on the road to madness? normality, abnormality, are notions that no longer mean anything. let us live in the ecstasy of infinity, let us love that which is boundless, let us destroy forms... _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- why not abandon this futile work and begin anew without repeating the same wasteful mistake? is subjective consciousness of eternity not enough? it is the feeling for eternity that the frenetic activity and trepidation of work has destroyed in us. work is the negation of eternity. the more goods we acquire in the temporal realm, the more intense our external work, the less accessible and farther removed is eternity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- unreal, normal and absurd, splendid and insipid. there is nothing worth more than anything else, nor any idea better than any other. why grow sad from one's sadness and delight _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- when you must be brave! who knows? you may still be a winner! and if you lose, does it really matter? is there anything to win in this world? all gain is a loss, and all loss is a gain. why always expect a definite stance, clear ideas, meaningful words?” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- why do men insist on achieving something? Would it not be better if they stood still under the sun in calm and silent immobility? what is there to accomplish? why so much effort and ambition? man has forgotten the meaning of silence. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- A Tantric ritual: during the initiation ceremony, you are given a mirror in which you see your own image. Contemplating it, you realize you are nothing but that, i.e., nothing. To what end, so many pretenses, so many airs and graces, when it is so easy to comprehend one’s insignificance? _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- To die at sixty or at eighty is harder than at ten or at thirty. Habituation to life, there’s the rub. For life is a vice— the greatest one of all. Which explains why we have so much difficulty ridding ourselves of it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It makes no sense to say that death is the goal of life. But what else is there to say? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- After all, why should ordinary people want to contemplate the End, especially when we see the condition of those who do? _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Only the perception of the Void allows us to triumph over death. For if everything lacks reality, why should death be allowed it? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- To find that everything lacks reality and not to put an end to it all, this inconsistency is not an inconsistency at all: taken to extremes, the perception of the void coincides with the perception of the whole, with the entrance into the All. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Since nothing has real substance, and life is a twirl in the void, its beginning and its end are meaningless. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Why do almost all madmen speak of God or believe themselves to be one? Having lost the actual contents of their memory, their mind has kept intact the original depths of memory. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Compared to philosophers, saints know nothing. Yet they know everything. Compared to Aristotle, any saint is illiterate. What makes us then believe that we might learn more from the latter? Because all of the philosophers put together are not worth a single saint. Philosophy has no answers. Compared to philosophy, saintliness is an exact science. It gives us precise answers to questions that philosophers do not even dare consider. Its method is suffering and its goal is God. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...how do you fill out an empty life? With women, books, or worldly ambitions? No matter what you do, the starting point is boredom, and the end self-destruction. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The ultimate goal of all religions: life as a diminution of the soul. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It may very well be that man's sole purpose is none other than to think of God...It is only by thinking of him that God makes one feel uncomfortable. Start prying into him and you are lost...God is an old frumpy coat which you must put on if you have nothing better to wear. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...a sort of terminal emotion seizes us. We can talk for hours on end with people we despise, we can say happy and irrelevant things without their noticing how close we are to the Last Judgment, and how lost we are to the world! _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The course of meditation: you begin by ignoring the object and end by ignoring the world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- If you don't take an interest in him, you end up interested in mankind. Could you fall any lower than that? _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Why then, knowing that in the last resort everything is unreal, still be carried away for such trifles? I am carried away, granted, but I am not involved, which is to say that I take no real interest. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_