# Teleological Paradox — Mitchell Heisman
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- “The following is an experiment in nihilism. Already I have contradicted myself! How can one believe in disbelief? I might be a nihilist except that I don’t believe in anything. If there is no extant God and no extant gods, no good and no evil, no right and no wrong, no meaning and no purpose; if there are no values that are inherently valuable; no justice that is ultimately justifiable; no reasoning that is fundamentally rational, then there is no sane way to choose _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “If no values are inherently valuable, then life has no inherent value. If life has no inherent purpose, then its end could be directed towards its negation or death. Death could be posited as the highest value. Since the other secular values are premised upon life, death is the test of all the _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The implications of life’s meaninglessness have not been elicited with sufficient ruthlessness. My methodology is honesty to the point of absurdity; honesty without mercy; honesty unprejudiced by morals, aesthetics, faith, or hope. When all illusions have been dispelled, at the end of overcoming subjectivities, biases, and prejudices towards life, one encounters the possibility of rational negation of self-interest; rational self-annihilation; rational self-destruction. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out precisely those truths that are most deadly and destructive to me. To will death through truth and truth through death. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “When I say that I do not believe in my emotions, I don’t meant that I don’t have them; I mean that I do not accord them any ultimate meaning or significance. Darwin’s The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals demonstrates why: emotions and instincts are the product of _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_