# Teleological Paradox — Herman Tønnessen
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- Great intro/summary of thesis, starting with reasons why humans do not experience their 'cosmic situation': “...cognitive...empathetic 'disintegrity'...to hold cognitively incompatible views or positions...to prevent knowledge from penetrating 'volitional' (etc.) personality layers and this permitting it to remain purely 'intellectual'...Man's knack for extracting intervals out of his total term of Being and filling them with work and other pastimes, external sensations, chatter and small talk… _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- This, to return to the analogy, empowers the crew and passengers in the space-ship to go on, polishing brass and playing bridge, blissfully unaware of their 'cosmic situation.' They are all psychologically healthy, content, well adjusted and accommodated: ontologically secure. They have a feeling of integral selfhood, of personal identity, and of the permanency of things. They believe in their own continuity – in being made of good, lasting stuff – and in meaning and order and justice in life and in the universe. In the most fortunate cases, there is a good, healthy unconditional surrender and submission to the norms of nicety and normalcy of the average, square-headed, stuffed-shirted, sanctimonious, middle-class North-American church-goer and bridge player, with his pseudo-intelligent, quasi-progressive, simili-cultured, platitudinal small-talk. Happy days! In this the best of all possible worlds. One doesn't notice until too late. In short: All is well (since nobody notices the end of 'all that is well') until one night: the day's work is well done and all the ships' crapulant fools frantically engulf themselves in a deadly serious game of bridge (till it is time for the night-cap and the tranquillizer). One of the 'dummies,' a champion brass polisher, suffering from an acute case of uncaused depression, goes to lie down for a while; he doesn't have a dime for the jukebox; the room is painfully satiated with embarrassing silence. Instantly and unexpectedly he is struck by an execrative curse of inverted serendipity. He suddenly, in unbearable agony, sees himself as an upholstered pile of bones and knuckles, with the softer parts slung up in a bad on the front side, and his whole like as a ludicrously brief interlude between embryo and corpse, two repulsive caricatures of himself. As for this flying farce, this nauseatingly trivial burlesque in a whirling coffin, and its aimless, whimsical flight through the void: 'What is it all about?' The question permeates him with dread and anguish, with 'ontological despair' and 'existential frustration.' 'Angsten' (Kierkegaard) constrains out of him all his puny, piddling hatreds, and petty ambitions in brass and bridge, and fills him with care and compassion for his fellow travelers. In other words, he has become a philosopher, an alienated, nostalgic 'cosmopath,' and, eo ipso, a case for psychologists and psychotherapists, some of whom want to study him and label his 'Daseinsweise,' others to 'unsick' him as well. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_