# Teleological Paradox — William James
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- To prove this point, Tolstoy quotes the Buddha, Solomon, and Schopenhauer. And he finds only four ways in which men of his own class and society are accustomed to meet the situation. Either mere animal blindness, sucking the honey without seeing the dragon or the mice—" and from such a way," he says, "I can learn nothing, after what I now know;" or reflective epicureanism, snatching what it can while the day lasts— which is only a more deliberate sort of stupefaction than the first; or manly suicide; or seeing the mice and dragon and yet weakly and plaintively clinging to the bush of life. Suicide was naturally the consistent course dictated by the logical intellect. "Yet," says Tolstoy, "whilst my intellect was working, something else in me was working too, and kept me from the deed— a consciousness of life, as I may call it, which was like a force that obliged my mind to fix itself in another direction and draw me out of my situation of despair…. During the whole course of this year, when I almost unceasingly kept asking myself how to end the business, whether by the rope or by the bullet, during all that time, alongside of all those movements of my ideas and observations, my heart kept languishing with another pining emotion. I can call this by no other name than that of a thirst for God. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- in any final system of truth. It is a pure abomination to the Lord, an alien unreality, a waste8 element, to be sloughed off and negated, and the very memory of it, if possible, wiped out and forgotten.” This sounds right to me. The Other world has no evil...nor any good! Beyond good and evil! It's Other, not good. Which is why Augustine says that Evil is negative in existence since evil is simply a lack of goodness. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- perish. Riches take wings; fame is a breath; love is a cheat; youth and health and pleasure vanish. Can things whose end is always dust and disappointment be the real goods which our souls require? Back of everything is the great spectre of universal death, the all-encompassing _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- end in sadness. This sadness lies at the heart of every merely positivistic, agnostic, or _(REN: (Unassigned))_