# Epistemological Rupture — Mitchell Heisman
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- The implications of life’s meaninglessness have not been elicited with sufficient ruthlessness. My methodology is honesty to the point of absurdity; honesty without mercy; honesty unprejudiced by morals, aesthetics, faith, or hope. When all illusions have been dispelled, at the end of overcoming subjectivities, biases, and prejudices towards life, one encounters the possibility of rational negation of self-interest; rational self-annihilation; rational self-destruction. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out precisely those truths that are most deadly and destructive to me. To will death through truth and truth through death. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- My formula for self-destruction is truth seeking. Doing so diverts me away from a normal path, the biological path or the path of life, and the entire mythological cave of human relationships. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is a fundamental hypothesis of this work that, not indifference, but an active blind spot to certain kinds of “truth _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is likely that most people will not even consider the veracity of this correlation between death and objectivity even if they understand it intellectually because most will consciously or unconsciously choose to place the interests of self-preservation over the interests of objectivity. In other words, to even consider the validity of this view assumes that one is willing and able to even consider prioritizing objectivity over one’s own self-preservation. Since it not safe to simply assume this on an individual level, let alone a social level, relatively few are willing and able to seriously address this issue (and majority consensus can be expected to dismiss the issue). In short, for most people, including most “scientists _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- I cannot fully reconcile my understanding of the world with my existence in it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “To pursue science, scientists must be justified by something that, strictly speaking, is not science itself, i.e. curiosity, wonder, faith in science, the will to master all knowledge, belief that _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- it will benefit the world, belief in pure knowledge for its own sake, or some other breach of objectivity. Because science, apparently, cannot consistently justify itself, something else must if it is to exist at all.” _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- My objective is to kill myself. Now how can I explain this? If reason cannot determine ultimate values, then how do I explain the facts of my values? I can begin to explain myself through the Nietzschean distinction between truth and life. It is a modern delusion to believe that pursuit of truth has any necessary correspondence with life-affirming values. To not gloss over the forks between these paths with myths and compromises, but to confront them openly, directly, and as far as possible, without illusion, can lead to the path of truth and death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Yet if Gödel is right, then it may be that to understand yourself is to understand that you can _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I cannot synthesize this work with my living, sociobiological existence. I cannot live with the implications of my work and this leaves the possibility of separating the interests of truth and life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “The distinction between the desire to know and the will to know is key here. The desire to know, motivated only by curiosity or pleasure, tends to be selective. The desire to know tends to ignore, repress, or otherwise not confront what is not conducive to pleasure or happiness. The will to _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- know is confrontation with all as it comes in life and a seeking out of the least pleasurable and the least joyous truths. This distinction is imperative here because I interpreted happiness, pleasure, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- My formula for self-destruction is truth seeking. _(REN: (Unassigned))_