# Epistemological Rupture — Martin Heidegger
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- (251-254) is talk about the ignoring of death, similar to Vivekananda's Maya where people just 'put off' their own deaths, e.g. it happens to 'them', 'her' or 'him', but not to me. People live in this deluded state to ward off the anxiety of death, of nonbeing. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- In the anticipation of this possibility it becomes 'greater and greater;' that is to say, the possibility reveals itself to be such that it knows no measure at all, no more or less, but signifies the possibility of the measureless impossibility of existence. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- “The moment of vision, however, brings existence into the Situation and discloses the authentic 'there'." _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- In particular, that in the face of which one has anxiety is not encountered as something definite with which one can concern onself; the threatening does not come from what is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand, but rather from the fact that neither of these 'says' anything any longer. Environmental entities no longer have any involvement. The world in which I exist has sunk into insignificance (my emphasis); and the world which is thus disclosed is one in which entities can be freed only in the character of having no involvement. Anxiety is anxious in the face of the nothing of the world (my italics); but this does not mean that in anxiety we experience something like the absence of what is present-at-hand with-the-world. The present-at-hand must be encountered in just such a way that it does not have any involvement whatsoever, but can show itself in an empty mercilessness. This implies, however, that our concernful awaiting finds nothing in terms of which it might be able to understand itself; it clutches at the 'nothing' of the world; but when our understanding has come up against the world, it is brought to Being-in-the-world as such through anxiety. Being-in-the-world, however, is both what anxiety is anxious in-the-face-of which one has anxiety is indeed already 'there'- namely, Dasein itself. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- read pg. 394/side note 344 concerning the universality and inescapability of anxiety and how it is the 'mood' or a foundation for a 'moment of vision' which allows for a 'resolution'. The resolution is God, the anxiety is Nihilism, Nihilism is God. The 'worldly' possibilities cannot distract one anymore, in anxiety the world crumbles, everything is emptied, Nihilism shows the Nothingness of the world) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- To say 'I know nothing about nothing' is to say, in the opposite, the same self-refuting nature of if Nihilism is true, then Nihilism cannot be true. Socrates' proposition was simply Nihilism in reverse. I know that I know nothing. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- When Dasein is resolute, it takes over authentically in its existence the fact that it is the null basis of its own nullity. We have conceived death existentially as what we have characterized as the possibility of the impossibility of existence- that is to say, as the utter nullity of Dasein. Death is not 'added on' to Dasein at its 'end' but Dasein, as care, is the thrown (that is, null) basis for death. The nullity by which Dasein's Being is dominated primordially through and through, is revealed to Dasein itself in authentic Being-towards-death. Only on the basis of Dasein's whole Being does anticipation make Being-guilty manifest. Care harbours itself in both death and guilt equiprimordially. Only anticipatory resoluteness understands the potentiality-for-Being-guilty authentically and wholly- that is to say, primordially. When the call of conscience is understood, lostness in the 'they' is revealed. Resoluteness brings Dasein back to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-self. When one has an understanding Being-towards-death- towards death as one's ownmost possibility- one's potentiality-for-Being becomes authentic and wholly transparent. The call of conscience passes over in its appeal all Dasein's 'worldly' prestige and potentialities. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Heidegger says that his sense of 'resoluteness' as the anticipation of Being-towards-death is 'unintelligible' to the common sense manner in which 'they' understand Dasein, or Being, to be. The path is narrow, Ha! _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Read about 'Being with Others”- I think that's the title of the section. Maybe he speaks in some sort of 'value' terms. Although, in 58., Heidegger states that the concept of 'Guilty!' must 'drop' the attatchment to 'law-breaking' or an 'ought' or 'concerful being with others', i.e. guilt needs to be ridded of the 'false' morality, i.e. it seems that Heidegger understands the Nothing of this world shows the nullity of all human/worldly morality. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_