# CompleteUnfinished I

* * *

# _The Religious Experience of Nihilism_

## **-Nihilism Preface-**

“…turn us into melancholy metaphysicians. The pride of life and glory of the world will shrivel. It is after all but the standing quarrel of hot youth and hoary old. Old age has the last word: the purely naturalistic look at life, however enthusiastically it may begin, is sure to end in sadness. This sadness lies at the heart of every merely positivistic, agnostic, or naturalistic scheme of philosophy. Let sanguine healthy-mindedness do its best with its strange power of living in the moment and ignoring and forgetting, still the evil background is really there to be thought of, and the skull will grin in at the banquet. In the practical life of the individual, we know how his whole gloom or glee about any present fact depends on the remoter schemes and hopes with which it stands related. Its significance and framing give it the chief part of its value. Let it be known to lead nowhere, and however agreeable it may be in its immediacy, its glow and gilding vanish.” James

“To this extent, nihilism, as the denial of a truthful world, of being, might be a divine way of thinking.” Nietzsche

“And to come back again to our first question,”What is the meaning of a philosopher paying homage to ascetic ideals?” We get now, at any rate, a first hint; he wishes to escape from a torture.” Nietzsche

This is a work of infinite ambition and utter worthlessness; a work of questions rather than answers. This is an interpretation of Nihilism that finds the ‘everyday’ view, the mainstream ‘philosophical’/intellectual definitions, misguided at best.

I will unapologetically quote from a variety of thinkers at length. Why do people have to ‘defend’ the use of other authors? Are you offended for having to ‘re-read’ something you already ‘know’? Do you simply crave ‘originality’ from an author? Every _one_ wants to pen their name into ‘eternity’; every _one_ wants to have their words heard; utter garbage. You’ve most likely interpreted these authors in a different way than in this work, so any quotes that seem ‘familiar’ should take on a new life for the reader.

“The fact that ‘They’, who hear and understand nothing but loud idle talk, cannot ‘report’ any call, is held against the conscience on the subterfuge that it is ‘dumb’ and manifestly not present-at-hand. With this kind of interpretation the ‘they’ merely covers up its own failure to hear the call and the fact that its ‘hearing’ does not reach very far.” Heidegger

“Nothing reveals more an extreme weakness of mind than not to know the misery of a godless man.” Pascal

I fight a battle between smug confidence and complete humility; both are equally paradoxical. The experience from which this work stems is as ‘real’ as anything that pertains to my existence. And yet doubt is at the forefront of every word that is written, every thought that comes into this stream of consciousness. I want to claim ‘Truth’ and I want to ask for ‘help’. This work will include differing tones, and may even seem as if, at least, two authors are writing.

“The neurotic exhausts himself not only in self-preoccupations like hypochondriacal fears and all sorts of fantasies, but also in others: those around him on whom he is dependent become his therapeutic work project; he takes out his subjective problems on them. But people are not clay to be molded; they have needs and counter-wills of their own. The neurotic’s frustration as a failed artist can’t be remedied by anything but an objective creative work of his own.” Becker

“I have all the defects of other people and yet everything they do seems to me inconceivable.” Cioran

When I imagine some kind of mythical encounter with any of the thinkers whose ideas I’ve quoted within this work, I am under no illusions -I’m sure I would perceive even the simple act of being in their presence as something utterly unbearable. The thoughts expressed in this work are not dependent on the mundane existence of the thinkers or their vast corpus of ‘works’. As Freud proclaimed:

“I have found little that is ‘good’ about human beings on the whole. In my experience most of them are trash, no matter whether they publicly subscribe to this or that ethical doctrine or to none at all. That is something that you cannot say aloud, or perhaps even think.”

A sentiment with which I emphatically agree with.

_There are no heroes here._

 However, what _is_ important concerning these thinkers is the way in which they all, each from their own unique backgrounds and perspectives, articulate a description of the same insights, as they are revealed through a specific, abstract experience - the experience of _Nihilism_. When these revealed insights of Nihilism are expressed, and further, made possible to be perceived as a unified ‘voice’, they take on a form that represents irrefutability.

 This is particularly useful for one, such as myself, who does not have a predominantly strong ‘way with words’. Even though names are given, the purpose of the quotes is to show a description of a particular experience, regardless of whether the person writing is a ‘proclaimed’ Christian, Hindu, ‘Nihilist’, or Saint, etc. If names were not given, it would be of no consequence, as the quotes attempt to show that there is no distinction; one should not be able to intuit the thinker’s ‘background’, their words should all converge, leaving one with the perception that every thought has emanated from a single, solitary mind.

As Cioran says: existence is plagiarism. I am not stating any ‘new’ information here. There is nothing to ‘know’. Their words are my words, and my words are their words. I hope that my ‘voice’ gets lost within these pages. There are too many people wanting to be ‘heard’. There are too many mouth-noises from those thinking they have something to actually say. Paradoxically, even with the quoting of many others, no one deserves to be heard; yet, as a member of the human species, the present author wishes to not have a ‘voice’.

Pascal, Kierkegaard, Cioran, Vivekananda, Nietzsche, Buber, Heidegger, Tillich, etc. all say the same exact thing within their own idiosyncratic language games. It ought to be considered plagiarism after one goes down the list of names in that each author describes a universal experience that is, seemingly, available to any human consciousness that is willing to participate.

“Sometimes I think that I am right when I agree with all the ancient teachers, at other times I think they are right when they agree with me. I believe in thinking independently. I believe in becoming entirely free from the holy teachers; pay all reverence to them, but look at religion as an independent research. I have to find my light, just as they found theirs. Their finding the light will not satisfy us at all. You have to become the Bible, and not to follow it, excepting as paying reverence to it as a light on the way, as a guidepost, a mark: that is all the value it has.” Vivekananda

How is any piece of writing considered ‘scholarly’? Moreover, why would any one want to be restricted by the arbitrary characteristics of ‘scholarly’? Any person who has written a book, or written down any substantial amount of their own thoughts, and who looks back on these words, and does not wish for everything to be either burned or re-written has become a worthless ‘philosopher’, not an authentic thinker. Any one who is ‘proud’ of their work is pathetic. If your work is ‘incomprehensible’ in style or verbiage, then all the more to it. Reading and ‘working out’ the author’s inner most thoughts is priceless, in comparison to the ‘polished’ versions we find in ‘Academia’ today.

“When you know quite absolutely that everything is unreal, you then cannot see why you should take the trouble to prove it.” Cioran

The most important, yet elementary, sentiment is this: No one knows what is ‘going on here’. What am I? Where did I come from? Where am I going? What is the purpose of existence? And so on. Taken as ‘silly’ questions by most and a ‘game’ for most ‘intellectuals’.

“What astonishes me most is to see that all the world is not astonished at its own weakness. Men act seriously, and each follows his own mode of life, not because it is in fact good to follow since it is the custom, but as if each man knew certainly where reason and justice are.” Pascal

“There is no doubt that creative work is itself done under a compulsion often indistinguishable from a purely clinical obsession. In this sense, what we call a creative gift is merely the social license to be obsessed. And what we call “cultural routine” is a similar license: the proletariat demands the obsession of work in order to keep from going crazy. I used to wonder how people could stand the really demonic activity of working behind those hellish ranges in hotel kitchens, the frantic whirl of waiting on a dozen tables at one time, the madness of the travel agent’s office at the height of the tourist season, or the torture of working with a jack-hammer all day on a hot summer street. The answer is so simple that it eludes us: the craziness of these activities is exactly that of the human condition. They are “right” for us because the alternative is natural desperation. The daily madness of these jobs is a repeated vaccination: against the madness of the asylum. Look at the joy and eagerness with which workers return from vacation to their compulsive routines. They plunge into their work with equanimity and lightheartedness because it drowns out something more ominous. Men have to be protected from reality.” Becker

There are no universal claims besides that of Nihilism (expand upon the ‘universal’ nature of the subjective ‘truth’ of Nihilism, quotes from Kierkegaard, find others). A self-refuting statement? Nihilism exists within paradox and contradiction. One could sum up Nihilism’s paradoxical nature in a sentence: Nihilism is Nothing and therefore Everything. Nihilism is nonrational.

There are only suggestions and observations here. Some who claim the characteristic of ‘authority’ will demand meditation, others will rail against it. Some will claim fasting is a must, others say make sure you eat plenty. Some will claim the natural world is all there is, others will swear that there is an Ultimate Reality. And on and on, everyone spewing a particular nonsense, all proclaiming the ‘path’ or the ‘truth’.

Nihilism as described in these pages is the only ‘truth’ that is and can be ‘known’, rather, experienced, by all humans who participate in the confrontation. There are no ‘paths’ (answers); if there are paths (answers), then there are infinitely many. Anyone who claims any ‘knowledge’ beyond the experience of Nihilism is simply pushing their subjectivity onto you and can be taken or left at one’s discretion.

“If we have broken discursive reason’s power over the question about the nothing and about being, then we have also decided the fate of the dominance of “logic” within philosophy. The very idea of “logic” dissolves in the vortex of a more original inquiry.” Heidegger

“That existence is pervaded by nihilating behavior attests to the permanent and indeed obscured manifestness of no-thing that dread originally discloses. But this means original dread is suppressed for the most part in existence. Dread is there. It’s only napping. Its breath permanently trembles in existence, only slightly in the apprehensive, and inaudibly in the”Uh húh!” and “Húh uh!” of those who are busy; best of all in the reserved, surest of all at the heart of existence that is daring. But this happens only in those for whom it expends itself in order to preserve the ultimate greatness of existence.” Heidegger

“So then he despairs, that is to say, by a strangely preposterous attitude and a complete mystification with regard to himself, he calls this despair. But to despair is to lose the eternal – and of this he does not speak, does not dream. The loss of the earthly as such is not the cause of despair, and yet it is of this he speaks, and he calls it despairing. What he says is in a certain sense true, only it is not true in the sense in which he understands it; he stands with his face inverted, and what he says must be understood inversely; he stands and points at that which is not a cause of despair, and he declares that he is in despair, and nevertheless it is quite true that despair is going on behind him without his knowing it. It is as if one were to stand with one’s back toward the City Hall and the Court House, and pointing straight before him were to say,”There is the City Hall and the Court House.” The man is right, there it is . . . if he turns around. It is not true, he is not in despair, and yet he is right when he says it. But he calls himself “in despair,” he regards himself as dead, as a shadow of himself. But dead he is not; there is, if you will, life in the characterization. In case everything suddenly changes, everything in the outward circumstances, and the wish is fulfilled, then life enters into him again, immediacy rises again, and he begins to live as fit as a fiddle. But this is the only way immediacy knows how to fight, the one thing it knows how to do: to despair and swoon – and yet it knows what despair is less than anything else. It despairs and swoons, and thereupon it lies quite still as if it were dead, like the childish play of “lying dead”; immediacy is like certain lower animals which have no other weapon or means of defense but to lie quite still and pretend they are dead.” Kierkegaard

Criticisms will be misdirected, necessarily. As the experience of Nihilism is rare, so are pertinent critiques. These are the interpretations of the insights that are produced from the experience of Nihilism. I ask no one to believe in, or adhere to, them. I will report what I experience without censorship. I will ‘unjustifiably’ condemn all of human thought and activity. I will contradict myself, sometimes intentionally and other times for lack of care. If I am perceived as ‘wrong’, and one assumes some sort of ‘worth’ in their criticism, then I believe the quotes used throughout this work will at least show that I am in good company. You are welcome to not read any further.

I don’t believe anything I think or say. There is no seeking of ‘approval’, there is no justification, as I am only the messenger, not the author.

“With regard to a poet people speak of his having a call; but as for becoming a priest, it seems enough to the generality of men (and that means of Christians) that one has taken an examination.” Kierkegaard

“This will seem to some a silly fiction.” Theresa of Avila

These are thoughts discovered within the mystery of existence that will not settle for anything that has so far been spoken by other humans. Nihilism, even with all its ‘glory’, has been the one concept that has been ‘ignored’, superficially fought against, or ignorantly dismissed as unworthy by almost all human beings. You can speak about how life is a ‘mystery’, but do you experience what it is like to be in a mystery? Or do you rather keep busy chasing the phantom of ‘happiness’? What could ever make you ‘content’ in this world? Contentment within the world is a sign of weakness and sickness, and you’re welcome to it. This is for those who are at the brink of madness, suicide, or are already ‘dead’.

I want to pursue what will make everyone else uncomfortable. I want to pursue madness. I want to work up the courage for suicide. Why attempt to ‘spoil’ another’s enjoyment, if I do not know what I am talking about, nor do I know the end, assuming there was an end to human existence? I am exhausted from the abrasive ‘optimism’ that surrounds all human interaction and activity. Existence is a nightmare with a few doses of ‘ease’ mixed with foolish conceptions of companionship.

There are no, or very few, real philosophers in the world. Would this fact add or subtract to the worthlessness of the world? Ha! True philosophers are like children always asking “Why?”. Everyone else is the unthinking robot who either spews their unquestioned, prepackaged ‘story of existence’, or even better, scolds the child for asking such ‘stupid’ questions. Like children, philosophers get stripped of their original, Platonic recollection and therefore become trapped within the world as unthinking robots. Ask most ‘philosophers’ about their ideas, instead of another thinkers, and watch them scramble for words.

“Memory reminds the soul how all earthly joys end, recalling the death of those who lived at ease; how some died suddenly and were soon forgotten, how others, once so prosperous, are now buried beneath the ground and men pass by the graves where they lie, the prey of worms, while the mind recalls many other such incidents.” Theresa of Avila

“The questions seemed so foolish, so simple, so childish; but no sooner had I begun my attempt to decide them than I was convinced that they were neither childish nor silly, but were concerned with the deepest problems of life, and again that I was, think of them as I would, utterly unable to find an answer to them.” Tolstoy

I would like to think of this work as a ‘story’ rather than an argument. This work will never be complete, as Nihilism contains no ‘solution’.

“There is no way of reaching the infinite.” Tillich

Is this work too ‘serious’? Is taking Nihilism serious some sort of criticism or defect? Logic? Nihilism dissolves its relevancy. Along with it any discomfort that stems from a meager ‘contradiction’. Saint Cecilia was sentenced to death by suffocation in her own bathhouse…she survived. An effort at beheading came as a consequence. Three attempts at her head were taken; she again survived. She died three days later from her wounds, singing all the time songs of praise for God. Can there be any accusation of taking Nihilism too seriously?

“The following is an experiment in nihilism. Already I have contradicted myself! How can one believe in disbelief?” Heisman

“A friend confessed to me that, foreseeing while in the full vigour of physical health the near approach of a violent death, he proposed to concentrate his life and spend the few days which he calculated still remained to him in writing a book. Vanity of vanities!” Unamuno

A prominent cosmologist states that he doesn’t very often ‘look up’ into the universe. Why is he pursuing his knowledge of the universe while behind a desk? He has not questioned what his subjective interest in ‘cosmology’ is even worth. He has not questioned why ‘knowledge’ ought to be pursued for its own sake. There is simply a curiosity that is slavishly driving him forward on a path that itself is not questioned.

“When I fancied that I stood alone I was really in the ridiculous position of being backed up by all Christendom. It may be, Heaven forgive me, that I did try to be original; but I only succeeded in inventing all by myself an inferior copy of the existing traditions of civilized religion. The man from the yacht thought he was the first to find England; I thought I was the first to find Europe. I did try to found a heresy of my own; and when I had put the last touches to it, I discovered that it was orthodoxy.” Chesterton

“You certainly have command of elegant and excellent similitudes, and sentiments: but, when you are engaged in sacred discussions, you apply them childishly, nay, pervertedly: for you crawl upon the ground, and enter in thought into nothing above what is human.” Luther

“One method, which everyone knows, is very common, and that is: ‘It may be very true, but do not think of it. ’Make hay while the sun shines,’ as the proverb says. It is all true, it is a fact, but do not mind it. Seize the few pleasures you can, do what little you can, do not look at the dark side of the picture, but always towards the hopeful, the positive side.’…It is put forward in the strongest way at the present time; but it fails, as it always must fail. We cannot hide a carrion with roses; it is impossible. It would not avail long; for soon the roses would fade, and the carrion would be worse than ever before. So with our lives. We may try to cover our old and festering sores with cloth of gold, but there comes a day when the cloth of gold is removed, and the sore in all its ugliness is revealed.” Vivekananda

“This is the voice that is leading us forward. Man has heard it, and is hearing it all through the ages. This voice comes to men when everything seems to be lost and hope has fled, when man’s dependence on his own strength has been crushed down and everything seems to melt away between his fingers, and life is a hopeless ruin. Then he hears it. This is called religion.” Vivekananda. **(The ‘Indefinite’ voice, compare to Heidegger)**

I feel that I should be writing something, but I have nothing to say.

“This simple observation has nothing to do with cultural pessimism—nor with any optimism either, of course; for the darkening of the world, the flight of the gods, the destruction of the earth, the reduction of human beings to a mass, the hatred and mistrust of everything creative and free has already reached such proportions throughout the whole earth that such childish categories as pessimism and optimism have long become laughable.” Heidegger

With this absurd endeavor of description before us, with its supposed ‘clarification’ of things that are beyond the scope of human comprehension, we are left stagnant in the realm of suggestion, with the smallest of possibilities that we will be able to _leave,_ having poisoned the well.

* * *

* * *

* * *

* * *

# **Extra Notes and Quotes**

look at Journal 11/12- thoughts about the laughing at children who ask ‘Why?’ questions.

“The more thoroughly reflected the despair is, the more rarely it occurs in the world. But this proves that most men have not become very deep even in despair; it by no means proves, however, that they are not in despair. There are very few men who live even only passably in the category of spirit; yea, there are not many even who merely make an attempt at this life, and most of those who do so, shy away. They have not learned to fear, they have not learned what “must” means, regardless, infinitely regardless of what it may be that comes to pass. Therefore they cannot endure what even to them seems a contradiction, and which as reflected from the world around them appears much more glaring, that to be concerned for one’s own soul and to want to be spirit is a waste of time, yes, an inexcusable waste of time, which ought if possible to be punishable by law, at all events is punished by contempt and ridicule as a sort of treason against men, as a froward madness which crazily fills up time with nothing. Then there is a period in their lives (alas, their best period) when they begin after all to take the inward direction. They get about as far as the first difficulties, there they veer away; it seems to them as though this road were leading to a disconsolate desert…This despair, as I have said, is the commonest, it is so common that only thereby can one explain the rather common opinion in common intercourse that despair is something belonging to youth, which appears only in youthful years, but is not to be found in the settled man who has come to the age of maturity and the years of wisdom. This is a desperate error, or rather a desperate mistake, which overlooks (yes, and what is worse, it overlooks the fact that what it overlooks is pretty nearly the best thing that can be said of a man, since far worse often occurs) – it overlooks the fact that the majority of men do never really manage in their whole life to be more than they were in childhood and youth, namely, immediacy with the addition of a little dose of self-reflection.” Kierkegaard

(get Vivekananda’s quote from&nbsp;_Journal_&nbsp;that talks about how he thinks their his ideas sometimes, and other people’s other times; and the subjectivity of Nihilism’s interpretation)

* * *

## Immortality-

“Such a “heaven” is the fruit of a union of Christian terminology with

ordinary worldliness, and it is convincing to no one who realizes that compromise in such ultimate matters is impossible; neither the true Orthodox Christian nor the consistent Nihilist is seduced by it.” Seraphim (get quotes from Tillich and Vivekananda about ‘immortality’ and put it in the mysticism section)

“even though belief in eternity is necessary as historical man’s unique consolation, the catastrophic ending of this tragedy of life and of man in particular will demonstrate the illusion of such naïve faith.” Cioran

“The anxiety of fate and death is most basic, most universal, and inescapable. All attempts to argue it away are futile. Even if the so-called arguments for the ‘immortality of the soul’ had argumentative power (which they do not have) they would not convince existentially…The popular belief in immortality…it does this by continuing one’s finitude, that is one’s having to die, infinitely, so that the actual death will never occur. This, however, is an illusion and, logically speaking, a contradiction in terms. It makes endless what, by definition, must come to an end. The ‘immortality of the soul’ is a poor symbol for the courage to be in the face of one’s having to die.”

“Living in heaven would not be very different from life in this world. At best, it would only be a very healthy rich man’s life, with plenty of sense-enjoyments and a sound body which knows no disease. It would be this material world, only a little more refined; and we have seen the difficulty that the external material world can never solve the problem. So no heaven can solve the problem…If we had a heaven like that desired by those to whom sense-enjoyment is the very end of existence, then we would not progress. That would be the most terrible curse we could pronounce on the soul. Is this all we can come to? A little weeping and dancing, and then to die like a dog! What a curse you pronounce on the head of humanity when you long for these things! That is what you do when you cry after the joys of this world, for you do not know what true joy is. What philosophy insists on is not to give up joys, but to know what joy really is. The Norwegian heaven is a tremendous fighting place where they all sit before Odin; they have a wild boar hunt, and then they go to war and slash each other to pieces. But in some way or other, after a few hours of such fighting, the wounds are all healed up, and they go into a hall where the boar has been roasted, and have a carousal. And then the wild boar takes form again, ready to be hunted the next day. That is much the same thing as our heaven, not a whit worse, only our ideas may be a little more refined.” Vivekananda

“For if nothingness be the center of the world, then the world, both in its essence and in every detail, is incoherent, it fails to hold together, it is absurd.” Seraphim

* * *

## Quotes about the Universal nature of Nihilism-

“…one might say perhaps that there lives not one single man who after all is not to some extent in despair, in whose inmost parts there does not dwell a disquietude, a perturbation, a discord, an anxious dread of an unknown something, or of a something he does not even dare to make acquaintance with, dread of a possibility of life, or dread of himself At any rate there has lived no one and there lives no one outside of Christendom who is not in despair, and no one in Christendom, unless he be a true Christian, and if he is not quite that, he is somewhat in despair after all.” Kierkegaard

“…every such existence, whatever it accomplishes, though it be the most amazing exploit, whatever it explains, though it were the whole of existence, however intensely it enjoys life aesthetically – every such existence is after all despair.” Kierkegaard

Simple Salvation (mention some aspects in preface, e.g.) “The narrow-mindedness of the natural man cannot welcome for itself the extraordinary which God has intended for him; so he is offended.” Kierkegaard

“And yet such a despairer, whose only wish is this most crazy of all transformations, loves to think that this change might be accomplished as easily as changing a coat.” Kierkegaard

“With regard to a poet people speak of his having a call; but as for becoming a priest, it seems enough to the generality of men (and that means of Christians) that one has taken an examination.” Kierkegaard (don’t worry about my credentials, anonymity)

“A man finds himself, to his great astonishment, suddenly existing, after thousands and thousands of years of non-existence: he lives for a little while; and then, again, comes an equally long period when he must exist no more. The heart rebels against this, and feels that it cannot be true.” Schopenhauer

“Now there are some subjects whom all this leaves a prey to the profoundest astonishment. The strangeness is wrong. The unreality cannot be. A mystery is concealed, and a metaphysical solution must exist. If the natural world is so double-faced and unhomelike, what world, what thing is real?” James

(Section of Suicide, not about the worldly, the human, the finite) “When the discoveries of possibility are honestly administered, possibility will discover all finitudes but idealize them in the shape of infinity, in anxiety overwhelm the individual, until the individual again overcomes them in the anticipation of faith. _What I say here may to many seem obscure and foolish talk, since they pride themselves on never having been in anxiety. To this I would reply that one should certainly not be in anxiety about persons, about finitudes; only someone who passes through the anxiety of the possible is cultivated to have no anxiety, not because this person can escape the terrible things of life, but because these always become weak by comparison with those of possibility._ If, on the other hand, the speaker maintains that the great thing about him is that he has never been in anxiety, I will gladly provide him with my explanation: that it comes from his being very spiritless.” Kierkegaard

Why take Nihilism seriously? Why take ‘suffering’, a subjective experience, seriously? One cannot, I cannot. Which is why I will never show my writings, show my thoughts…worthless.

(This is perfect for Naturalism Sectio? How does one lean on God and give over everything to Him and still stand on his own feet as a passionate human being? These are not rhetorical questions, they are real ones that go right to the heard of the problem of ‘how to be a man’- a problem that no one can satisfactorily n) “How, in other words, can one be a saint and still organize scientific movements of world-historical importanceadvise anyone else on, as the wise William James knew. The whole thing is loaded with ambiguity impossible to resolve.” Becker

(This could be in Language or Mysticism Section) “The real work of religion must be one’s own concern. I have an idea of my own, I must keep it sacred and secret, because I know that it need not be your idea. Secondly, why should I create a disturbance by wanting to tell everyone what my idea is? Other people would come and fight me. They cannot do so if I do not tell them; but if I go about telling them what my ideas are, they will all oppose me. So what is the use of talking about them? This Ishta should be kept secret, it is between you and God.” Vivekananda

* * *

* * *

# _The Abyssal Experience of Nihilism_

## -Philosophy and Direct Experience-

(#direxperience)

“…the most important question is whether there is an important question. The only serious question is whether there is anything to take seriously.” Heisman

“To study philosophy is nothing but to prepare one’s self to die." Cicero

“Only because no-thing is manifest at the heart of existence can the full strangeness of being come over us. Only if the strangeness of being impresses us does it waken us and open us up to wonder. Only on the basis of wonder, that is, the manifestness of no-thing, does the “Why?” come up.” Heidegger

The Nothing of the world must be seen through the filthiest of lenses. The meaninglessness of human activity is found, not within a subjective value judgment, but rather in the ignorant finitude of all human activity. The ‘pushing forward’ of most human mindsets is one that is built upon the ignorance of the experience of Nihilism. Distractions and diversions are written into the language of ‘normal’ human beings. What does one do when these distractions and diversions fail, when the natural mechanisms of consciousness that keep a human ‘sane’ break down? What does one do when one comes ‘face to face’ with Nihilism? Is suicide a ‘rational’ option in the face of Nothingness? Is there a ‘path’ that allows one to live alongside the Nothing? Is the ‘naked anxiety’ found within human experience too much of a burden for one to endure, never mind pursue, in the constructing of a world-view? Can one build a philosophy of religion based upon the Nothing of the world? Beyond the question of ‘possibility’ with regards to constructing such a philosophy of religion, is there some demand to do so? Does the Nihilistic experience contain any ‘constructive’ content that may allow itself to be interpreted as a ‘religious’ experience?

“All great conversions are born from the sudden revelation of life’s meaninglessness. Nothing could be more impressive than this sudden apprehension of the void of existence.” Cioran

Humans are damned to philosophize, whether this is done in the unlearned fashion of the everyday person who is fooled into thinking he is ‘free’, ‘smart’, and ‘comfortable’ while in the chains of his cliches, or whether done in the style of the lofty analytic philosopher who believes that he is ‘making a difference’ when he puts on his suit and tie, stands up in front of a room of seven, and delivers his paper on ‘counter-factuals’. As it is practiced in the American Universities, philosophy has become seemingly nothing more than a fancy Sudoku puzzle used to satiate the boredom of ‘intellectuals’. The claims of Nihilism (taken in their overlapping declarations concerning the ‘negative’ status of moral, existential, epistemological, and metaphysical ‘truths’) have been dispelled, at best, as ‘unanswerable’, and at worst, as ‘unworthy’ for concern, within most of the analytical tradition. Ultimate questions have been diminished into a clash of one incomplete argument against another.

“When he has not a book between his fingers he cannot think. When he thinks, he responds to a stimulus (a thought he has read),-finally all he does is to react. The scholar exhausts his whole strength in saying either " yes " or " no " to matter which has already been thought out, or in criticising it-he is no longer capable of thought on his own account… In him the instinct of self-defence has decayed, otherwise he would defend himself against books. The scholar is a decadent.” Nietzsche

Listen to a scholar speak; within the first few words, at best sentences, the name of another thinker will come out of their mouth. They will then begin to sketch this thinker’s ideas or concepts. They will then input some small amount of their own thoughts, that rarely constitute much more than a smearing around of the other thinker’s thoughts.

The atheist philosopher’s with their so-called ‘problem of evil’ act as if their rejection of a ‘god’, one that can be boxed into the finite human intellect, is somehow the ‘intellectually superior’ position while conveniently forgetting the fact that they themselves lack any non-pragmatic ground for trusting human reason within a wholly naturalistic worldview. Why believe that your inductive inferences about ‘God’s existence’ ought to be grounded purely in reason? In other words, why be ‘rational’? Why value reason over Absurdity in an Ultimately purposeless universe that has no ‘end’ or goal?

“We are all atheists, and yet we try to fight the man who admits it. We are all in the dark; religion is to us a mere intellectual assent, a mere talk, a mere nothing. We often consider a man religious who can talk well. But this is not religion.” Vivekananda

It is no better on the other side, where one finds ‘religious’ philosophers shelling out their hubris filled ‘theodicies’ in a pathetic effort to defend their small god by diminishing the Other into some conception of human ‘oughts’ or a self-satisfying version of skepticism that never goes far enough to stop all their babble about the Other. The scene is as pathetic, if so much so as to be comical, as to be equivalent to a sleep-walker, with a scalpel in his hand, strutting with confidence into the operating room ‘ready’ to perform surgery. Philosophy does all this while working under the guise of a Socratic Method, yet without a mindset that even remotely resembles that of a Doubting Socrates.

“Philosophy can never directly supply the forces and create the mechanisms and opportunities that bring about a historical state of affairs, if only because philosophy is always the direct concern of the few. Which few? The ones who transform creatively, who unsettle things.” Heidegger

“Only the small begins small—the small, whole dubious greatness consists in diminishing everything…” Heidegger

“To look upon healthier concepts and values from the standpoint of the sick, and conversely to look down upon the secret work of the instincts of decadence from the standpoint of him who is laden and self-reliant with the richness of life-this has been my longest exercise, my principal experience. If in anything at all, it was in this that I became a master.” Nietzsche (The entire point of philosophy. A position and its counter)

“First, I attack only things that are triumphant-if necessary I wait until they become triumphant. Secondly, I attack only those things against which I find no allies, against which I stand alone-against which I compromise nobody but myself…I have not yet taken one single step before the public eye, which did not compromise me: that is my criterion of a proper mode of action.” Nietzsche

“Understanding has revealed to us that there is nowhere to flee from Nothingness.” Shestov

Philosophy is hanging itself.

This paradigm in philosophy, of the ‘supremacy’ of reason, is based upon a false interpretation of the Socratic Method that has been deformed by the positivistic, scientism style of thinking that philosopher’s, disregarding Heidegger’s warnings, attempt to ‘follow’ along distorting philosophy into a false counterpart of science. Philosophers have ambitiously ‘elevated’ reason, as the sole characteristic of human beings that separates us from other animals, to an exaggerated degree.

Is the ‘Socratic Method’ to be used as a tool for knowledge or is it a way to open up the mystery of human existence? Is this bizarre method of analytic philosophy the explanation for why philosophers are constantly talking past one another, cloaking philosophy into a ‘rationalization’ for beliefs that are held on other grounds besides ‘reason’?

Whatever ‘philosophy’ actually is, if pursued honestly and fully, does it not lead to skepticism and doubt? Does it not leave one with the question ‘Why?’ Is philosophy’s false ‘elevation’ of reason the drive behind the criticisms coming from the scientistic community? The analytic tradition of philosophy is too distant from the existential conditions of man. The ‘intellectual’ trappings on the philosophers have eliminated the direct experiences of certain forms of human consciousness, in turn giving these ‘thinkers’ the false impression that they are ‘doing something’ with their existence.

“yet other philosophies and doctrines say almost nothing about death. the only valid attitude is absolute silence or a cry of despair. some people maintain that the fear of death does not have a deeper justification, because as long as there is an i there is no death, and once dead there is no i any longer. these people have forgotten about the very strange phenomenon of gradual agony. what comfort does this artificial distinction between the i and death offer a man who has a strong premonition of death? what meaning can logical argument or subtle thought have for someone deeply imbued with a feeling of the irrevocable? all attempts to bring existential questions onto a logical plane are null and void. philosophers are too proud to confess their fear of death and too supercilious to acknowledge the spiritual fecundity of illness. their reflections on death exhibit a hypocritical serenity; in fact, they tremble with fear more than anyone else. one should not forget that philosophy is the art of masking inner torments.” Cioran

‘Intellectual’ notions of Nihilism are always stillborn. No one knows

what is going on here. No one knows the ‘Why?’ to existence. Why is it, then, that philosophers move forward with an attitude of self-assurance, in a purely pragmatic or worldly fashion, without any ground beneath them? Why do they build these philosophical systems in the air? Does the equivalent of a ‘One has to live’ tag-line suffice, amongst all the convoluted jargon, for today’s philosophers? Why not simply blow your brains out the back of your head? Are the fleeting ‘joys’ and transitory ‘attachments’ of your life worth keeping you within the nightmare of human existence?

“And the most tragic problem of philosophy is to reconcile intellectual necessities with the necessities of the heart and the will. For it is on this rock that every philosophy that pretends to resolve the eternal and tragic contradiction, the basis of our existence, breaks to pieces. But do all men face this contradiction squarely?” Unamuno

“only the organic and existential thinker is capable of this kind of seriousness, because truth for him is alive, born from inner agony and organic disorder rather than useless speculation. out of the shadow of the abstract man, who thinks for the pleasure of thinking, emerges the organic man, who thinks because of a vital imbalance, and who is beyond science and art.” Cioran

“Some people, it is true, can live contentedly with a philosophy of meaninglessness for a very long time. But in most cases it will be found that these people possess some talent or accomplishment that permits them to live a life which, to a limited extent, is profoundly meaningful and valuable. Thus an artist, or a man of science can profess a philosophy of general meaninglessness and yet lead a perfectly contented life…artistic creation and scientific research are absorbingly delightful occupations…They are proclaimed to be ends absolutely in themselves – ends so admirable that those who pursue them are excused from bothering about anything else.” Huxley

Schopenhauer wrote that “Philosophy can never do more than interpret and explain what is given.” Philosophy is the unending 'Why?” in an attempt to open up the mystery of being, to reach out towards the ground of all things. Philosophy lacks any authoritative, normative prescriptions in and of itself; philosophy is only concerned with the ‘logical’ consequences of a particular proposition, regardless of the ontology of any specific consequences or their starting point. Philosophy, then, if it is to contribute anything to our project, must derive an analysis, or a ‘map of consequences’, that are drawn out and put into a new language that is grounded in the direct human experience of Nihilism. This is the preambles of such a task. (Maybe this needs to be the opening paragraph)

“The mind is not to be ruffled by vain arguments, because argument will not help us to know God. It is a question of fact, and not of argument. All argument and reasoning must be based upon certain perceptions. Without these, there cannot be any argument. Reasoning is the method of comparison between certain facts which we have already perceived.” Vivekananda

Does philosophy, as defined, therefore, have any contribution to make concerning the experience of Nihilism? Our ‘philosophy’ is not a series of ‘arguments’, nor a system of knowledge seeking a ‘rational’ justification. The experience of Nihilism, in its distinct yet relational forms of boredom, anxiety, depression, ecstasy, despair, and so on, for those who have felt Its presence, are taken as a ‘reality’. We must seek to discover whether there is some ‘message’ to be found within Nihilism and to draw out any ‘constructive’ content, even if, in the end, it is ultimately illusory.

“Even if the experience of the void were only a deception, it would still deserve to be tried. What it proposes, what it attempts, is to reduce to nothing both life and death, and this with the sole intention of making them endurable to us.” Cioran

The ‘truth’ of the suggested consequences of Nihilism will be left to subjectivity. We will follow the sentiment of Heisman when he states that “Nihilism is where science and philosophy meet.”While we are specifically looking to explore whether there is any sort of ‘constructive’ content, any sort of ‘message’, to be found within Nihilism for which we may build a language, ‘philosophy’ as we have defined it, although without demanding any one authoritative interpretation or absolute vocabulary.

With regards to the experience of Nihilism, one may choose a reductionist, materialist explanation as easily as one may choose what we may refer to as Transcendental. The former is found within the worldly philosophy/psychology and metaphysical naturalism of science and psychology, while the latter normally falls under the domain of religion or theology and the subsequent dying ‘languages’ developed within these disciplines.

The Philosopher, Heidegger, and his analysis of the human condition will be paramount for exploring Nihilism as the universal human experience. Heidegger makes definitive distinctions in his analysis of the human condition to ensure there is no added confusion by a placing of any particular, definite, structures onto or into his language. This ‘separating from’ is put in terms of disallowing any general ‘atheistic’ or ‘theistic’ accounts.

“The ontological analysis of conscience on which we are thus embarking, is prior to any description and classification of Experiences of conscience, and likewise lies outside of any biological ‘explanation’ of this phenomenon (which would mean its dissolution). But it is no less distant from a theological exegesis of conscience or any employment of this phenomenon for proofs of God or for establishing an ‘immediate’ consciousness of God…we must neither exaggerate its outcome nor make perverse claims about it and lessen its worth.” Heidegger pg. 313

“If the interpretation continues in this direction, one supplies a possessor for the power thus posited, or one takes the power itself as a person who makes himself known- namely God. On the other hand one may try to reject this explanation in which the caller is taken as an alien manifestation of such a power, and to explain away the conscience ‘biologically’ at the same time. Both these explanations pass over the phenomenal findings too hastily.” Heidegger pg. 320

“Only when death is conceived in its full ontological essence can we have any methodological assurance in even asking what may be after death; only then can we do so with meaning and justification. Whether such a question is a possible theoretical question at all will not be decided here.” Heidegger pg. 292

“This demands that we transform our human being into its openness (dread effects this transformation in us) so that we can grasp the nothing that shows up in dread exactly as it shows up. It also demands that we expressly avoid all characterizations of the nothing that do not come from a corresponding experience of the nothing. (my emphasis)” Heidegger

This suggests that the term ‘religious’ must be avoided, or re-defined, due to its necessary vagueness, and due to its inevitably of being dragged down into the world of pragmatism and self-concern that goes by the name of ‘religious’ today. Furthermore, it must also reject a sort of ‘lyricism’ of that found within mystic traditions.

Rather, the more ‘neutral’ term ‘Transcendence’ will be substituted in its place. ‘Transcendence’ here need not be concerned with anything accept that which can be referred to as ‘Wholly-Other’. In other words, as suggestive of a feature of human experience that is not entirely deconstructive or naturalistic.

It must also be made clear that Transcendence is not associated with the ‘supernatural’, in any ‘spooky’ sense of the word, due to this term also containing many specifically mystical/mythical ‘religious’ connotations, e.g. heaven, hell, demons, angels, and so on, that need not concern us here. The Nihilistic experience is one, we claim, that holds, or lends itself, to a Transcendent interpretation, yet is equally founded, with equal powers of convincing, within the dogmas of Naturalism.

“The void allows us to erode the idea of being; but it is not drawn into this erosion itself; it survives the an attack which would be self-destructive for any other idea.” Cioran

“If the myth is understood literally, philosophy must reject it as absurd. It must demythologize the sacred stories, transform the myth into a philosophy of religion and finally into a philosophy without religion.” Tillich

We claim the various depths of Nihilism are the ground of all Transcendent interpretations of human experience. This perennial experience is found in abundance, yet any particular ‘path’ or ‘solution’ proposed by any individual, when confronted with Nihilism, will be ignored and seen as a distraction from any ‘message’ that may be found within the ‘reality’ of Nihilism. There is no escaping from Nihilism, there is no ‘completion’ within this world. The finite is indefinitely separated from the Infinite.

All confusions, whether philosophical, naturalistic, or religious, stem from attempts of moving past the Nihilistic experience. It would therefore be prudent to heed Heidegger’s words.Behind all the dogmas, rituals, ceremonies, and assorted ‘practical’ modes of behavior normally found within most of the worlds religions, there is a common ground that is, for the most part, consciously or intuitively covered up (no one is completely free from experiencing Nihilism). The ‘practical’ behaviors end up as another distraction from the universal nature of Nihilism.

The worldly forms of religion, when taken as ends in themselves, when taken literally, are indistinguishable from a wholly materialist, naturalistic worldview. The finite language of human beings cannot ever be in complete grasp of the Other. The misguided presumption of ‘sacred’, as is given the label to such ‘religious’ movements, must be recognized solely in their subjectivity; and even then within the acknowledgment of a complete skepticism. The same criticism holds for philosophy and everyday life with its worldly pursuits. Any ‘meaning’ that is built upon a material, transitory structure will inevitably collapse as illusory (regardless if it collapses for any one individual).

“Any fool can talk. Even parrots talk. Talking is one thing, and realising is another. Philosophies, and doctrines, and arguments, and books, and theories, and churches, and sects, and all these things are good in their own way; but when that realisation comes, these things drop away.” Swami Vivekananda

“In true faith the ultimate concern is a concern about the truly ultimate; while in idolatrous faith preliminary, finite realities are elevated to the rank of ultimacy. The inescapable consequence of idolatrous faith is ‘existential disappointment,’ a disappointment which penetrates into the very existence of man!” Tillich

For those who have not suffered the overwhelming experience of Nothingness, for those who still find ‘something’ within the world, these words will more than likely be tossed away and labeled as ‘whining and pouting’. To interpret a Taoist saying into the relevance of Nihilism: the common people will laugh at it, the ‘intellectual’ will understand but not experience, and the one who experiences will be left to the Nothingness of the world.

“the It world…one has to live and also can live comfortably- and that even offers us all sorts of stimulations and excitements, activities and knowledge. In this firm and wholesome chronicle the You-moments appear as queer lyric-dramatic episodes.” Buber

“But along with this tranquilization, which forces Dasein away from its death, the “they” at the same time puts itself in the right and makes itself respectable by tacitly regulating the way in which one has to comport oneself towards death. It is already a matter of public acceptance that ‘thinking about death’ is a cowardly fear, a sign of insecurity on the part of Dasein, and a sombre way of fleeing from the world. The “they” does not permit us the courage for anxiety in the face of death.” Heidegger

“This ‘movement’ of Dasein in its own Being, we call its “downward plunge”. Dasein plunges out of itself into itself, into the groundlessness and nullity of inauthentic everydayness. But this plunge remains hidden from Dasein by the way things have been publicly interpreted, so much so, indeed, that it gets interpreted as a way of ‘ascending’ and ‘living concretely’.” Heidegger

If Nihilism is, as we claim, the ground for all Transcendent thinking, we must first put an emphasis on the direct experience of Nihilism. Swami Vivekananda’s words speak to this:

“In one form or another, we are all in it. It is a most difficult and intricate state of things to understand. It has been preached in every country, taught everywhere, but only believed in by a few, because until we get the experiences ourselves we cannot believe in it (my emphasis). What does it show? Something very terrible. For it is all futile. Time, the avenger of everything, comes, and nothing is left. He swallows up the saint and the sinner, the king and the peasant, the beautiful and the ugly; he leaves nothing. Everything is rushing towards that one goal, destruction. Our knowledge, our arts, our sciences, everything is rushing towards it. None can stem the tide, none can hold it back for a minute. We may try to forget it, in the same way that persons in a plague-stricken city try to create oblivion by drinking, dancing, and other vain attempts, and so becoming paralysed. So we are trying to forget, trying to create oblivion by all sorts of sense-pleasures.”

Nietzsche, the so-called ‘Nihilistic-Prophet’, also stresses the need for the experience of Nihilism. In his words: “…because nihilism represents the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and ideals— because we must experience nihilism before we can find out what value these ‘values’ really had.”

”It might seem frightful to any one who does not realize the nothingness and absurdity of an isolated personal life, and who believes that he will never die. But I know that my life, considered in relation to my individual happiness, is, taken by itself, a stupendous farce, and that this meaningless existence will end in a stupid death.” Tolstoy

“Suddenly every vain hope became worthless to me.” St. Augustine

Tønnessen supplies a vivid example of the primacy of experience:

“Another question…is the question of whether such insights can be taught…The so-called ‘engaged’ discourse introduced in heart-philosophy admits of a third component which we may tentatively designate the degree of integration of knowledge. An example will indicate what may be meant by the expressions “integrated” and “integration”…the Finns caught a Russian spy…He knew the outcome…When finally the death sentence is pronounced, he completely collapses. What on earth happened? He knew the outcome with absolute certainty. We should want to say the spy knows about his immanent death now, in a new and terrifying way. He has suddenly obtained an insight, a knowledge which penetrates him, goes through bones and marrow and violently shakes up the total personality structure into its deepest and darkest labyrinths. Unfortunately, this “integration” of knowledge cannot be taught in any ordinary sense of teaching.”

There is a hidden meaningless throughout all of the worlds activities that are drawn out from such an experience of Nihilism. But before going too far, what do we mean when we speak of an ‘experience of Nihilism’? We must first lay out the ontological basis of this Nothingness, which can be done in various forms. Only then will there be any possibility of conceiving the development of a language of Nihilism. Due to my lack of creativity, I will quote, at length, Tønnessen’s graphic depiction of such an experience:

“They have a feeling of integral selfhood, of personal identity, and of the permanency of things. They believe in their own continuity – in being made of good, lasting stuff – and in meaning and order and justice in life and in the universe. In the most fortunate cases, there is a good, healthy unconditional surrender and submission to the norms of nicety and normalcy of the average, square-headed, stuffed-shirted, sanctimonious, middle-class North-American church-goer and bridge player, with his pseudo-intelligent, quasi-progressive, simili-cultured, platitudinal small-talk. Happy days! In this the best of all possible worlds. One doesn’t notice until too late. In short: All is well (since nobody notices the end of ‘all that is well’) until one night: the day’s work is well done and all the ships’ crapulant fools frantically engulf themselves in a deadly serious game of bridge (till it is time for the night-cap and the tranquillizer). One of the ‘dummies,’ a champion brass polisher, suffering from an acute case of uncaused depression, goes to lie down for a while; he doesn’t have a dime for the jukebox; the room is painfully satiated with embarrassing silence. Instantly and unexpectedly he is struck by an execrative curse of inverted serendipity. He suddenly, in unbearable agony, sees himself as an upholstered pile of bones and knuckles, with the softer parts slung up in a bad on the front side, and his whole like as a ludicrously brief interlude between embryo and corpse, two repulsive caricatures of himself. As for this flying farce, this nauseatingly trivial burlesque in a whirling coffin, and its aimless, whimsical flight through the void: ‘What is it all about?’ The question permeates him with dread and anguish, with ‘ontological despair’ and ‘existential frustration.’”

“In dread, as we say, “something is uncanny.” What do we mean by “something” and “is”? We cannot say what the uncanny something is about. There is something like this about the "as a whole”: all things and we ourselves sink into indifference. (my emphasis) Not in the sense of merely disappearing, but rather, in its very moving away, it turns to us. This moving away of be-ing as a whole that closes in on us in dread pressures us. There’s nothing to get a hold on. All that remains and comes over us in the slipping away of be-ing is this "no-thing. "Dread reveals no-thing.” Heidegger

“In particular, that in the face of which one has anxiety is not encountered as something definite with which one can concern onself; the threatening does not come from what is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand, but rather from the fact that neither of these ‘says’ anything any longer. Environmental entities no longer have any involvement. The world in which I exist has sunk into insignificance (my emphasis); and the world which is thus disclosed is one in which entities can be freed only in the character of having no involvement. Anxiety is anxious in the face of the nothing of the world (my emphasis); but this does not mean that in anxiety we experience something like the absence of what is present-at-hand with-the-world. The present-at-hand must be encountered in just such a way that it does not have any involvement whatsoever, but can show itself in an empty mercilessness.” Heidegger

We may also express Nihilism in the form of a question: first, put into your mind the most meaningful ‘thing’ of your existence, whether this is family, a project, a cause, a nation, or even ‘oneself’. Now, can you imagine what you hold to be most meaningful, the thing that makes your existence come across as a real possibility, as being worthless, as utterly void of all meaning?

I have yet to meet a person with even a slight indication of what this question is referring to. To answer in the affirmative is to have experienced a deconstructive-terror that runs through one’s entire being. There is a vanishing of any ground that one has placed under the feet of existence. William James puts it this way:

“Conceive yourself, if possible, suddenly stripped of all the emotion with which your world now inspires you, and try to imagine it AS IT EXISTS, purely by itself, without your favorable or unfavorable, hopeful or apprehensive comment. It will be almost impossible for you to realize such a condition of negativity and deadness.” And although Nihilism is found universally within the human condition, the experience is still only to be received in piecemeal, which informs us on one possible reason for why its extreme forms are so rare.

“In great despair, for example, when all weight tends to dwindle away from things and the sense of things grows dark, the question looms.” Heidegger

“If existence only relates itself to being by being aimed in advance at no-thing in order to be able to exist, and if no-thing originally becomes manifest only in dread, must we not then remain permanently suspended in this dread in order to be able to exist at all? Yet have we ourselves not already admitted that this original dread is rare? But above all, all of us exist and relate ourselves to being which we ourselves are not and which we ourselves are—without such dread. Is this not an arbitrary finding and the no-thing attributed to it an exaggeration?” Heidegger

“Now what does it mean that this original dread happens only in rare instances? Nothing other than this: no-thing is at first and for the most part disguised in its originality. But how? By our getting lost in being in certain ways. The more we turn to being in our dealings, the less we let being as such slip away, the more we turn away from no-thing. Thus all the more certainly are we forced into the public superficialities of existence.” Heidegger

'but why is the experience of agony so rare? Can it be that our hypothesis is entirely false and that sketching a metaphysics of death is possible only by accepting death’s transcendental nature?” Cioran

“No one is continually subject to the obsession with this horror. Sometimes we turn from it, almost forget it…” Cioran

“Now, the great majority of mankind endure life without any great protest, and believe, to this extent, in the value of existence, but that is because each individual decides and determines alone, and never comes out of his own personality like these exceptions: everything outside of the personal has no existence for them or at the utmost is observed as but a faint shadow.” Nietzsche

“Enter through the narrow gate. For wide is the gate and broad is the road that leads to destruction, and many enter through it. But small is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life, and only a few find it.” Matthew 7:13-14

Even the one who experiences Nihilism one of its deeper forms is left with a sense of suspicion, a suspicion that this ‘Nihilism’ is still _too foreign_. All must ask the question of whether the actual ‘reality’ of Nihilism, along with the resonant echo, or maybe just one’s intuition, of a possibility of there being a ‘something’ that lurks behind all Nihilistic experiences.

The busyness of the world, the conscious fleeing from the human condition, the ‘taking serious’ of any particular worldly endeavor, the lack of uncanniness within the material world, these are ways in which one drives out, whether consciously, instinctually, or both; and even though, ‘it’ is right behind you, directly in front of you, above and below you, if you’d just turn around…no, you’re just ‘imagining’ things “Everything is fine here”. If there is any ‘message’ beyond that of the first experience of Nihilism that reveals the Nothingness of the world, then very few will reach the depths of the dissolution of one’s own subjectivity.

The path may be narrow, but why does it seem to also be ‘obstructed’ to such an extreme degree? The ‘falling’ nature of human beings as being wrapped up within the world, combined with the rarity of Nihilism, is an unbearable weight for the one who is seeking authenticity, for one attempting a participation with Nihilism.

(maybe Kierkegaard “double-mindedness” and James “divided-self” quotes here?)

“When anxiety has subsided, then in our everyday way of talking we are accustomed to say that ‘it was really nothing’.” Heidegger

“Compared to philosophers, saints know nothing. Yet they know everything. Compared to Aristotle, any saint is illiterate. What makes us then believe that we might learn more from the latter? Because all of the philosophers put together are not worth a single saint. Philosophy has no answers. Compared to philosophy, saintliness is an exact science. It gives us precise answers to questions that philosophers do not even dare consider. Its method is suffering and its goal is God.” Cioran

One way in which Nietzsche speaks of Nihilism comes from a term he referred to as the ‘Absurd Valuation’. He puts his description in the mouth of his Zarathustra: “What is your greatest experience? It is the hour of the great contempt. The hour in which even your happiness becomes repulsive to you, and even your reason and virtue. The hour when you say: "What good is my happiness! It is poverty and dirt and wretched contentment. But my happiness should justify existence itself! The hour when you say:

“What good is my reason! does it long for knowledge as the lion for his food? It is poverty and dirt and wretched contentment!” The hour when you say: "What good are my virtues?! As yet they have not made me rage with passion. How weary I am of my good and evil! It is all poverty and dirt and wretched contentment!”

I prefer the term '_Absurd Perspective’_. This is the ‘revelation’ of the paralyzing nature of Nihilism that comes from the absence of values, hence making all judgments, movements, efforts, concerns, and offenses as baseless as any other; we are left with any response or action being reduced to Absurdity, since humans are necessarily forced to make value judgments in a valueless universe. All human movements are motivated by a value judgment. Without moral values, no non-arbitrary human action can be made. With all possibilities ‘equivalent’ there is no right or wrong, there is no up or down, all possibilities drop off, there is only Nothing…yet humans act in the world.

An aspect of the Absurd Perspective can in fact be described in an empirical context found within the consequences of the ‘Multiverse’ or ‘World-Ensamble’, a view that many modern physicists postulate as a description of ‘reality’. Regardless if the multi-verse is the ‘correct’ view of reality, assuming it is ‘true’, there are consequences that follow from such a position, which go seemingly unnoticed by both scientists and philosophers of science. In short, if there are an infinite number of ‘universes’ and, in theory, an infinite number of ‘yous’, then any decision, in any given situation that is possible, will be made by one of ‘you’. Therefore, it is only an illusion when one finds themselves ‘caught’ in some form of a ‘moral crisis’, since no matter which option is chosen, whether you believe it to be the ‘right’ decision based on intuition, feelings, or from philosophical comtemplation, all other options will also be chosen, by ‘you’. This turns every ‘important’ choice or decision into a triviality. Subjective morality and meaning are utterly empty, when choice is simply illusory. This is to refrain from getting stuck in the cobwebs of ‘free will’ and ‘determinism’. If an infinite world-assemble is in fact our reality, then determinism is as true as it ever could be, even if ‘free will’, if this concept can even be made sense of, is granted in each individual universe.

The reply is anticipated: 'Regardless if all choices are made elsewhere, my decision still matters here, to me, in this world?” Let’s also not digress into details concerning the ‘A’ and ‘B’ theories of time. But, we may suggest, in passing, that if we assume that the ‘B’ theory of time is correct, and there is no temporal becoming, there is no privileged ‘now’. Therefore, your birth is as ‘real’ as your death; your existence is equivalent to a movie reel that is sprawled out across the ground frame by frame. Even with that said, hapless as it is, there is no doubt that this still does matter to you.We can put forth Nihilism in yet another way. The insatiable credulity in the way in which most humans force an elevation of subjective meaning on to one’s life, with a conscious denial of objectivity, shows a lack of The Experience concerning the paradoxical nature of human subjectivity and ‘deep-time’. Human minds have not ‘evolved’ in a way in which to properly handle the exorbitant amount of time in which science has so far discovered about the universe and the human situation within it. Within the billions of years of evolution, the almost fourteen billion year old observable piece of space-time, humans have developed a local, restricted, ‘small world’ understanding of the situation they find themselves in. This ‘small world’ understanding allows for most to live safely, ‘out of sight-out of mind’, shielded from the horrors that underpin self-conscious existence.The ‘problem’ of the denial of Nihilism, followed by the proposing of a meaning within the world of ‘deep time’, comes from the fact that most of human existence has been completely erased without a trace of their even ‘being here’, except if one wants to count what can be found of ‘them’ in the strands of our DNA.

“All civilizations become defunct. All species die out. There is even an expiration date on the universe itself…the universe as nothing in motion.” Ligotti

“A thousand varieties of man – Piltdown, Neanderthal, Chellean, Acheulean, Mousterian, Aurignacian, Cro-magnon, Rhodesian, Pekin man – lived for thousands of years, fought, thought, invented, painted, carved, made children, and left no more to posterity than a few flints and scratches, forgotten for millennia

and found only by the picks and spades of our inquisitive day. A thousand civilizations have disappeared under the ocean or the earth, leaving, like Atlantis, merely a legend behind…” Durant

“All the power of knowledge and wealth once made has passed away — all the sciences of the ancients, lost, lost forever. Nobody knows how. That teaches us a grand lesson. Vanity of vanities; all is vanity and vexation of the spirit.” Vivekananda

“…everything in the instincts that is beneficial, that fosters life and that safeguards the future is a cause of suspicion. So to live that life no longer has any meaning: this is now the “meaning” of life…Why be public-spirited? Why take any pride in descent and forefathers? Why labour together, trust one another, or concern one’s self about the common welfare, and try to serve it?” Nietzsche

To pronounce everything as ‘meaningless’ is to show zero appreciation for every human struggle, the billions of years of conflict found within all sentient creatures, down to every replicating cell; what a big responsibility to take on, if there was any such thing as ‘responsibility’. Is the most hubris filled act that of embracing of Nihilism? Is the Saint, the one who renounces the entire world, nothing but the most selfish of creatures?

All actions will be erased. All accomplishments will disappear. All cares, concerns, achievements, disappointments, and failures will be as if they never occurred. With this fact of existence, why is it that humans still insist on thrusting a sense of worldly meaning onto their individual lives? Why can someone sit there with a smile on their face, proclaim ‘But my life is meaningful!’, in the face of the consequences of ‘deep time’, and not be seen as psychologically or intellectually deficient? The only way to justify such thought and behavior, in a universe that itself will eventually die in ruins, is to maintain some neurotic form of justification for the value of being alive. How does one justify their stance of intrinsic value on life, no matter what (for now stepping back from the proponents of euthanasia or the proclamations of many ‘theistic’ believers)? The ‘logic’ of life, that existence is ‘better’ than non-existence, has not only proceeded without justification, it is rarely even questioned. Worldly ‘meaning’ is dead. Yet there is no ‘argument’ to convince another against being able to find meaning within the world. One must experience the Nothing of the world directly.

“…there are two inevitable conditions of life, confronting all of us, which destroy its whole meaning; (1) death, which may at any moment pounce upon each of us; and (2) the transitoriness of all our works, which so soon pass away and leave no trace…And therefore, however we may conceal it from ourselves, we cannot help seeing that the significance of our life cannot lie in our personal fleshly existence…” Tolstoy

An illustration may bring some additional clarity, even if it does lack any force of convincing. Imagine you wake up one day and find yourself inside of a gated tennis court. You are there with another person, racket in hand, and the gate to the court cannot be opened, there is no escape. Your partner happens to mention that there is no tennis ball, yet insists on ‘playing’. Would you consent to this game of ‘tennis’? Would you ‘go through the motions’ of swinging mindlessly at a phantom ball that does not exist? Would you argue with your partner who takes a swing at the ‘ball’ and asserts on his scoring a point? Would you regard the ‘meaning’ that your partner finds in this game worthy of the label ‘meaningful’? If you could invent some form of subjective meaning to this ‘game’, how long would it keep you content? And can you change your mind, many times over, on the ‘meaning’ of this game? How long would you stay motivated to participate? At what point would you give up? Would anyone want, or be able, to participate in such an obscene activity? Can anyone, who’s not simply being argumentative or denialistic, claim any ‘meaning’ behind such an activity? Anyone perceiving the situation properly would have to insist on not participating in such a ridiculous situation. But, then, what?

“Genuine boredom has not yet arrived if we are merely bored with this book or that movie, with this job or that idle moment. Genuine boredom occurs when one’s whole world is boring. Then abysmal boredom, like a muffling fog, drifts where it will in the depths of our openness, sucking everything and everyone, and ourselves along with them, into a numbing sameness. This kind of boredom reveals what-is in terms of a whole.” Heidegger

Nihilism takes the ‘ball’ away from the game of life. Each new ‘game’ that is invented eventually succumbs to absurdity and boredom. One constantly finds new things ‘to do’, yet are they ever fully satisfied? To wonder as Pascal did: why can’t humans sit alone in a room? I’ll let Pascal expand on this observation:

“Nothing is so insufferable to man as to be completely at rest, without passions, without business, without diversion, without study. He then feels his nothingness, his forlornness, his insufficiency, his dependence, his weakness, his emptiness. There will immediately arise from the depth of his heart weariness, gloom, sadness, fretfulness, vexation, despair.”

This fact, that man is always attempting to do something, shows that there is some search he is on. Is this purely a natural instinct to survive and reproduce? A ‘will to live’ for no Ultimate reason? This Transcendental yearning, this pull towards the Infinite, instead of being confronted, is almost always translated into some worldly activity. There is nothing to find in this world. People want Simple Salvation; no one wants to participate in the Nothingness.

“Hiding facts is not the way to find a remedy. As you all know, a hare hunted by dogs puts its head down and thinks itself safe; so, when we run into optimism; we do just like the hare, but that is no remedy.” Vivekananda

“Everything that we do to make our existence secure is like the act of the ostrich, when she hides her head in the sand, and does not see that her destruction is near. But we are even more foolish than the ostrich.” Tolstoy

I see a world of human bodies, scampering around in ignorant-confusion, within the illusion of confidence, all with their own little, black cloud of death hovering over their heads. “What a Meaningful life!”, shouted the man who’s heart only seconds later unknowingly delivered him into Nothingness. He’s already a memory.Tolstoy captures his realization of Nihilism as follows:

“I was only astonished that this had not occurred to me before, from premises which had so long been known. Illness and death would come (indeed they had come), if not to-day, then to-morrow, to those whom I loved, to myself, and nothing would remain but stench and worms. All my acts, whatever I did, would sooner or later be forgotten, and I myself be nowhere. Why, then, busy one’s self with anything? How could men see this and live? It is possible to live only as long as life intoxicates us; as soon as we are sober again we see that it is all a delusion, and a stupid one! In this, indeed, there is nothing either ludicrous or amusing; it is only cruel and absurd.” (pg. 282 journal, Buddha, Pascal, Vivekananda)

If the world is Nothing, and is experienced as such, what is left? Madness, suicide, or the Other. The ‘message’ of Nihilism may not be wholly deconstructive, yet, at the same time, is the ‘More’ of Nihilism essentially unknowable? What is the ‘More’ of Nihilism? Are ‘madness, suicide, and the Other’ all that distinct? Does madness lead to suicide, or to the Other? Does the Other lead to Suicide? To develop a language or philosophy of Nihilism leaves open the possibility that it may indeed lead to, or find no distinction in, madness, suicide or the Other.

“And indeed the Christian is, in a certain sense–in an ultimate sense–a “Nihilist”; for to him, in the end, the world is nothing, and God is all. This is, of course, the precise opposite of the Nihilism we have examined here, where God is nothing and the world is all; that is a Nihilism that proceeds from the Abyss, and the Christian’s is a “Nihilism” that proceeds from abundance.” Fr. Sarephim Rose“in such moments you will be severed from life, from love, smiles, friends and even from death. and you will ask yourself if there is anything besides the nothingness of the world and your own nothingness.” Cioran

“But then, Nothingness is only Nothingness. How did it happen to turn into Something? And once having become Something, how did it acquire such limitless power over man, and even over all existence?” Shestov

* * *

* * *

# _The Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism_

## -Awaken, Material Nightmare-

“I know that I must either find a way to move beyond the theistic patterns of the past in search for a new way to speak of and to engage the ultimate reality that I call God, or be honest about living in a godless world.” Spong

“…even if God did exist, that would change nothing.” Sartre

“…practical men tell us, ‘don’t bother your heads with such nonsense as religion and metaphysics. Live here; this is a very bad world indeed, but make the best of it.’ Which put in plain language means, live a hypocritical, lying life, a life of continuous fraud, covering all sores in the best way you can. Go on putting patch after patch, until everything is lost, and you are a mass of patchwork. This is what is called practical life. Those that are satisfied with this patchwork will never come to religion. Religion begins with a tremendous dissatisfaction with the present state of things, with our lives, and a hatred, an intense hatred, for this patching up of life, an unbounded disgust

for fraud and lies. He alone can be religious who dares say, as the mighty Buddha once said under the Bo-tree, when this idea of practicality appeared before him and he saw that it was nonsense, and yet could not find a way out.” Vivekananda

Many have spoken of the Nihilistic experience properly, but almost all turn their back from Nihilism and flee into some activity of distraction. As Heidegger says, one is always falling back into the world.

“Throwness is neither a ‘fact that is finished’ nor a fact that is settled. Dasein’s facticity is such that as long as it is what it is, Dasein remains in the throw, and is sucked into the turbulence of the ‘They’s’ inauthenticty.” pg. 223

“In everydayness Dasein can undergo dull ‘suffering’, sink away in the dullness of it, and evade it by seeking new ways in which its dispersion in its affairs may be further dispersed. In the moment of vision, indeed, and often just ‘for that moment’, existence can even gain the mastery over the “everyday”; but it can never extinguish it.” Heidegger

“Nothing is so plain from the course of the existential analytic so far, as the Fact that the ontology of Dasein is always falling back upon the allurements of the way in which Being ordinarily understood.” Heidegger pg. 439

This divided-self, this double-mindedness, is one in which there is no escape. To make clear, this ‘always falling’ has been, at least within Western, Christian cultures, painted with the mythological language of ‘original sin’ (or with a scientific, evolutionary tale that reduces consciousness and all of its phenomenons as a mistake or accident). This unbridgeable disconnect between the finite and the Infinite has been excepted only ‘intellectually’ while shunned, in action, by almost all with their ‘solutions’ and ‘answers’, except the rare few who have the ‘stamina’ to renounce the world in its entirety and who hold that reality is simply an unreality.

“Meanwhile time passes. If outward help comes, then life returns to the despairer, he begins where he left off; he had no self, and a self he did not become, but he continues to live on with only the quality of immediacy. If outward help does not come, then in real life something else commonly occurs. Life comes back into him after all, but “he never will be himself again,” so he says. He now acquires some little understanding of life, he learns to imitate the other men, noting how they manage to live, and so he too lives after a sort. In Christendom he too is a Christian, goes to church every Sunday, hears and understands the parson, yea, they understand one another; he dies; the parson introduces him into eternity for the price of $10 – but a self he was not, and a self he did not become.” Kierkegaard

“A thinker erects an immense building, a system, a system which embraces the whole of existence and world-history etc. – and if we contemplate his personal life, we discover to our astonishment this terrible and ludicrous fact, that he himself personally does not live in this immense high-vaulted palace, but in a barn alongside of it, or in a dog kennel, or at the most in the porter’s lodge. If one were to take the liberty of calling his attention to this by a single word, he would be offended. For he has no fear of being under a delusion, if only he can get the system completed…by means of the delusion.” Kierkegaard

“In spite of the fact that a man is in despair he can perfectly well live on in the temporal, in fact all the better for it; he may be praised by men, be honored and esteemed, and pursue all the aims of temporal life. What is called worldliness is made up of just such men, who (if one may use the expression) pawn themselves to the world. They use their talents, accumulate money, carry on worldly affairs, calculate shrewdly, etc., etc., are perhaps mentioned in history, but themselves they are not; spiritually understood, they have no self, no self for whose sake they could venture everything, no self before God – however selfish they may be for all that.” Kierkegaard

“Is not despair simply double-mindedness? For what is despairing other than to have two wills?” Kierkegaard

“Thus did my two wills, one new, and the other old, one carnal, the other spiritual, struggle within me; and by their discord, undid (tore) my soul (apart).” St. Augustine

“…give me beauty in the inward soul; and may the outward and inward man be at one.” Plato

“Two enemies- the same man divided.” Cioran

“Natural good is not simply insufficient in amount and transient, there lurks a falsity in its very being. Cancelled as it all is by death if not by earlier enemies, it gives no final balance, and can never be the thing intended for our lasting worship. It keeps us from our real good, rather; and renunciation and despair of it are our first step in the direction of the truth. There are two lives, the natural and the spiritual, and we must lose the one before we can participate in the other.” James

“I and You drown; humanity that but now confronted the deity is absorbed into it; glorification, deification, universal unity have appeared. But when one returns into the wretchedness of daily turmoil, transfigured and exhausted, and with a knowing heart reflects on both, is one not bound to feel that Being is split, with one part abandoned to hopelessness?” Buber

“Nature her self, apparently, will torment thee, she being always an Enemy to the Spirit, which in depriving her of sensible Pleasures, remains Weak, Melancholy, and full of Irksomeness, so that it feels a Hell in all Spiritual Exercises, particularly in that of Prayer, hence it grows extremely impatient to be at an end of it, through the uneasiness of Thoughts, the lassitude of Body, importunate Sleep, and the not being able to curb the Senses, every one of which would for it own share, follow its own Pleasure.” Molinos

A Jew, a Christian, a Nihilist. There’s a ‘Hindu’ in there too somewhere.

The naturalistic side of humanity, which constantly pulls one down into the world, into the concerns of the finite, into taking serious the transitory nature of all worldly things, cannot be overcome. The divided-self, the falling nature of man, the ‘pulling’ in contrary directions as existing as both simultaneously natural and Transcendent, is one that comes with great insights as part of the human condition. This split within the human consciousness helps explain the way in which people cannot live up to the ideals of philosophy/theology/religion etc. and are doomed to be pulled back down, in all its depravity, into the world leaving one with a feeling of ‘being guilty’.

“The common sense of the “They” knows only the satisfying of manipulable rules and public norms and the failure to satisfy them. It reckons up infractions of them and tries to balance them off. It has slunk away from its ownmost Being-guilty so as to be able to talk more loudly about making “mistakes”…Though the call gives no information, it is not merely critical; it is positive, in that it discloses Dasein’s most primordial potentiality-for-Being as Being-guilty…” Heidegger

There is a never ending frustration within the divided nature of human consciousness for which the consequence is described as guilt. The conception of ‘guilt’, under Heidegger’s analysis, gets rescued from a worldly stuckness of a feeling of owing something to someone else or not living up to another’s worldly ideals or ‘oughts’. ‘Guilt’, in its existential sense, stems from the ‘always falling’ condition, as being dragged around by a pure materialism, as not even attempting to recognize the possibility of one’s True-Self.

Guilt is not for others, guilt is directed at oneself in the frustrated state of the Natural man who, as Becker puts it, is both ‘worm and god’; a ‘god who shits’. In Nihilism, others become insignificant and the Original Self becomes one’s fascination; there is no longer a feeling of ‘owing’ anyone or anything. How different, then, is this Self, this inner Transcendent intuition that ‘separates’ itself from the purely Natural side of man, from the Other? Are they one in the same?

“on the heights of despair, the passion for the absurd is the only thing that can still throw a demonic light on chaos. When all the current reasons- moral, esthetic, religious, social, and so on - no longer guide one’s life, how can one sustain life without succumbing to nothingness?” Cioran

This ‘fascination’ with the Transcendent side of the Self takes the form of a renunciation of the world and a turning inward. Only those who are trapped in the game of human morality attempt to ‘save’ others. Non-movement, a negative ‘morality’, is left in place of the denial of material concerns. Vivekananda puts it this way:

“Charity is great, but the moment you say it is all, you run the risk of running into materialism…You Christians, have you found nothing else in the Bible than working for fellow creatures, building hospitals?..The architect of the universe is going to be taught by the carpenters! He has left the world a dirty hole, and you are going to make it a beautiful place! That sort of practical religion is good, not bad; but it is just kindergarten religion. It leads nowhere.”

“To have faith one must remain passive vis-a-vis the world. The believer must not do anything.” Cioran

“I know hereby what advantage belongs to doing nothing (with a purpose). There are few in the world who attain to the teaching without words, and the advantage arising from non-action…Heaven and earth do not act from (the impulse of) any wish to be benevolent; they deal with all things as the dogs of grass are dealt with. The sages do not act from (any wish to be) benevolent; they deal with the people as the dogs of grass are dealt with.” Tao Te Ching

And Luther maybe puts it most damningly, paraphrasing the influential figure of ‘Jesus’: “How far different from this is the instruction of Christ: that, we should rather despise the whole world!”

St. Seraphim Rose is emphatically against any sort of ‘utopian’ thinking or ‘doing good’: “First and foremost I radically question the emphasis upon “action” itself, upon “projects” and “planning,” upon concern with the “social” and what man can do about it—all of which acts to the detriment of acceptance of the given, of what God gives us at this moment, as well as of allowing His will to be done, not ours.” He reiterates contrary to human morality: “…it lies, not in the area of “political commitments” and “social responsibilities…If, in so doing, we help to ameliorate or abolish a social evil, that is a good thing—but that is not our goal.”

“The philosophical portion denounces all work however good, and all pleasure, as loving and kissing wife, husband or children, as useless. According to this doctrine all good works and pleasures are nothing but foolishness and in their very nature impermanent. "All this must come to an end sometime, so end it now; it is vain.” Vivekananda

“…it proceeds to ‘disvalue’ together with the self the tribe to which the person belongs, and indeed, together with that, all existence in general.” Otto

“Heaven and earth do not act from (the impulse of) any wish to be benevolent; they deal with all things as the dogs of grass are dealt with. The sages do not act from (any wish to be) benevolent; they deal with the people as the dogs of grass are dealt with.” Taoism

“The slime of personal and emotional love is remotely similar to the water of the Godhead’s spiritual being, but of inferior and of insufficient quantity…human beings can do something to mitigate the horrors of their situation by ‘keeping one another wet with their slime.’ But there can be no happiness or safety in time and no deliverance into eternity, until they give up thinking that slime is enough and, by abandoning themselves to what is in fact their element, call back the eternal waters…the modern idolaters of progress…prefer an agonizing and impossible existence on dry land to love, joy and peace in our native ocean.” Huxley

“what should i do? work for a social and political system, make a girl miserable? hunt for weaknesses in philosophical systems, fight for moral and esthetic ideals? it’s all too little.” Cioran

“No one has power over the body or over the world. That means there is nothing we can do: let the world exist for itself as it pleases or as it thinks best; we shall learn, and teach others, to do without the world and without the body that belongs to this world.” Shestov

“All these experimented virtues make a brilliant showing; for an instant they are enchanting like an oriental poem: such self-control, such firmness, such ataraxia, etc., border almost on the fabulous. Yes, they do to be sure; and also at the bottom of it all there is nothing.” Kierkegaard

The positive outlook is pathetic. ‘Positivity’ is giving up, a fleeing from Nihilism. The Pathetic person wants to say that everything is alright, that every thing is “just fine”. It’s to ignore our condition. In other words, it’s to ignore existence. It is the truly lazy mentality, which the non-movement of the Nihilist is so often accused of. The Nihilist does not like what she sees around her. She shuts down, since there is no ultimate difference in her actions.

There is no such thing as “progress”, only mere change from one state of affairs to the next; the definition of arbitrary. The Pathetic person is trying to hold on to their secret. The Pathetic person, instead of retreating into despair pretends to conquer existence by never fully facing it; most of the time running away from it as fast as their distractions will take them.

The Pathetic person has surrendered, yet continues to pretend, to go through the motions, day after day, with that forced smile upon their face. What kind of existence is worse than this? What a sham! The person who acts out in the world, promotes “progress”, actually helps others, etc., is still nothing more, regardless of all the kicking and screaming, than the frozen figure of “positivity”. There is nothing but fake, inauthentic movements that simulate a life. There is nothing but insignificant change in an insignificant life. Progressive movements are nonsensical.

The negative appropriation of Nihilism simply exemplifies that the distractions of life have not broken down for such a person; the stranglehold of illusion that worldly meaning has is cancerous to the Transcendental. Worldly meaning spreads into and infects all aspects of our existence, allowing even the most mundane and ridiculous actions to be experienced as ‘meaningful’. Assuming an intrinsic value to their being, the finite, nonsensical, ignorant existence of the human is put forth as an ideal with what seems as a complete disregard for the horrific consequences of such a perspective. The words of Kempus have still not traveled far enough: “He is the truly wise man, who counteth all earthly things as dung…”. Ligotti makes this point in his unrelentingly pessimistic tone when he declares: “As a threat to human continuance, nihilism is as dead as God.” A participation with, rather than a fleeing from, is necessary to bring out Nihilism’s uttermost forms. Why would anyone want to ‘participate’ in Nihilism?

“I am wrong in saying ‘security,’ for there is no security in this life; understand that in suchcases I always imply: ‘If they do not cease to continue as they have begun.’ What misery to live in this world! We are like men whose enemies are at the door, who must not lay aside their arms, even while sleeping or eating, and are always in dread lest the foe should enter the fortress by some breach in the walls. How canst Thou wish us to prize such a wretched existence?” Theresa of Avila

“The general acceptance of a doctrine that denies meaning and value to the world as a whole, while assigning them in a supreme degree to certain arbitrarily selected parts of the totality, can only have evil and disastrous results…We have thought of ourselves as members of supremely meaningful and valuable communities – deified nations, divine classes and what not – existing within a meaningless universe.” Huxley

Instead, the unreality of the world is pushed forth in a form of either an ironically morbid ‘optimism’ or a blindfolded indifference. One sees this everyday as he confronts another unthinking robot who projects a labored smile as he speaks through his teeth about 'how great it is to be alive.” Or the restrained shudder of inconvenience that comes from one who has just heard the news that a relative or friend has died.

“only the sick man is delighted by life and praises it so that he won’t collapse.” Cioran

“Once a fishwife was a guest in the house of a gardener who raised flowers. She came there with her empty basket, after selling fish in the market, and was asked to sleep in a room where flowers were kept. But, because of the fragrance of the flowers, she couldn’t get to sleep for a long time. Her hostess saw her condition and said, ‘Hello! Why are you tossing from side to side so restlessly?’ The fishwife said: ‘I don’t know, friend. Perhaps the smell of the flowers has been disturbing my sleep. Can you give me my fish-basket? Perhaps that will put me to sleep’.” So with us. The majority of mankind delights in this fish smell — this world, this enjoyment of the senses, this money and wealth and chattel and wife and children. All this nonsense of the world — this fishy smell — has grown upon us. We can hear nothing beyond it, can see nothing beyond it; nothing goes beyond it. This is the whole universe.” Vivekananda

“The soulish-bodily synthesis in every man is planned with a view to being spirit, such is the building; but the man prefers to dwell in the cellar, that is, in the determinants of sensuousness. And not only does he prefer to dwell in the cellar; no, he loves that to such a degree that he becomes furious if anyone would propose to him to occupy the bel etage which stands empty at his disposition- for in fact he is dwelling in his own house.” Kierkegaard

“And this corporeal element, my friend, is heavy and weighty and earthy, and is that element of sight by which a soul is depressed and dragged down again into the visible world…” Plato

“…each pleasure and pain is a sort of nail which nails and rivets the soul to the body.” Plato

“They shall wear elegant and ornamented robes, carry a sharp sword at their girdle, pamper themselves in eating and drinking, and have a superabundance of property and wealth;— such (princes) may be called robbers and boasters. This is contrary to the Tao surely!” Taoism

The illusory, subjective nature of all value judgments that pushes us forward, damning us to constantly make value judgments within a valueless world, with our inability to refrain from valuations, is Absurd. As ‘solutions’ to the Absurd, there are some who put forth a sense of irony, as suggested by Nagel, while others assert various forms of ‘indifference’. And while these may be the closest conception of ‘equanimity’ that one can seemingly grasp in the face of Nihilism, this is still only a process of reasoning about Nihilism, and therefore will be drowned in the encounter with Nihilism. Irony or indifference are effectual to those who are still only ‘intellectualizing’, rather than actualizing Nihilism. An ‘attitude’ cannot be reached through a process of one inference to another. The suggestions of irony or indifference not only fail as a ‘response’ due to lending itself as a distraction from any ‘message’ that may be found within Nihilism, if there is one to be found, but it

is as derisory as requesting the healing of a bullet wound by means of deduction.

“Humanist stoicism is possible for certain individuals for a certain time: until, that is, the full implications of the denial of immortality strike home. The Liberal lives in a fool’s paradise which must collapse before the truth of things. If death is, as the Liberal and Nihilist both believe, the extinction of the individual, then this world and everything in it-love, goodness, sanctity, everything-are as nothing, nothing man may do is of any ultimate consequence and the full horror of life is hidden from man only by the strength of their will to deceive themselves…” Seraphim

“The absurd man thus catches sight of a burning and frigid, transparent and limited universe in which nothing is possible but everything is given, and beyond which all is collapse and nothingness. He can then decide to accept such a universe and draw from it his strength, his refusal to hope, and the unyielding evidence of a life without consolation.” Camus

The majority of unthinking humans retreat into a superficial-selfish interpretation of the religious languages of their time, into the proximity of their family relations, into the distractions of their worldly pleasures. Or as Kierkegaard puts it: “The sectarians deafen one another with their noise and clamor, keep anxiety away with their screeching.” Heidegger says that within the noise and hustle of the world, by avoiding a confrontation with the Authentic Self, the ‘They’ are ‘rewarded’ with the illusion of ‘ascending’ and ‘living concretely’.

“We fear that if theism is dismissed, only a bottomless pit remains…Many forms of religion are little more than cultural manifestations of the fear of nothingness. That is why people become hysterical when theism is challenged.” Spong

“for them there is only one kind of agony, the one immediately preceding the fall into absolute nothingness. only such moments of agony bring about important existential revelations in consciousness. that is why they expect everything from the end instead of trying to grasp the meaning of a slow revelatory agony. the end will reveal too little, and they will die as ignorant as they have lived.” Cioran

Nihilism is wholly-destructive to the world. The one who experiences Nihilism cannot retreat back into the world of ‘things’. ‘Things’ are all too transparent. The world is dead. I wish to quote Tønnessen once more at length, due to both the unfortunately relative obscurity of his paper and for the clear example in which he describes the human situation:

“The world is what it seems to be to a dry, unimaginative, down to earth, square-headed stuffshirt about mid-morning after a good night’s rest. And as for such questions as what it means to live and die – there’s nothing to it, it is commonplace, almost everybody does it. We are thrown into an absurdly indifferent world of sticks and stones and stars and emptiness. Our “situation” is that of a man who falls out of the empire state building. Any attempt at “justifying” our brief, accelerating fall, the inconceivably short interlude between our breath-taking realization of our “situation” and our inexorable total destruction, is bound to be equally ludicrous; i.e. whether we choose to say: (a) “This is actually quite comfortable as long as it lasts, let’s make the best of it.” or (b) “Let us at least do something useful while we can,” and we start counting the windows on the building. In any event, both attitudes presuppose an ability to divert ourselves from realizing our desperate “situation,” to abstract, as it were, every single moment of the “fall” out of its irreparable totality, to cut our lives up into small portions with petty, short time-span goals.”

“It is infinitely comic that a man can understand the whole truth about how wretched and petty this world is, etc. -that he can understand this, and then cannot recognize again what he understood; for almost in the same moment he himself goes off and takes part in the same pettiness and wretchedness, takes glory in it and receives glory from it, that is, accepts it.” Kierkegaard

“We cannot hide a carrion with roses; it is impossible. It would not avail long; for soon the roses would fade, and the carrion would be worse than ever before. So with our lives. We may try to cover our old and festering sores with cloth of gold, but there comes a day when the cloth of gold is removed, and the sore in all its ugliness is revealed.” Vivekananda

A relevant example of this sort of ‘unthinking’, or lack of realization of Transcendence, can be found within the mindset of a majority of practicing scientists today. Science, assuming some form of ‘realism’, as describing ‘reality’ with physical laws, allows one to predict and ‘know’ what is or will happen within the world. However, to stop at this formal description of reality is unphilosophical. The Philosopher wants to ask why the descriptions of science are the way they are.

It is ‘understood’ that ‘particles’ and ‘molecules’ bump into one another in a particular pattern which produce the physical objects that we see around us, including ourselves. To comprehend a description of things is not to comprehend the ‘Why?’, i.e. what are the motives that drive seemingly mindless particles and molecules in acting in the ways in which they do? Why are there ‘things’, why are these ‘things’ following a particular rational structure, and why is there a 'building process’ found within these ‘living things’? These philosophical questions are shunned by a majority of mainstream scientific ‘intellectuals’ who are satisfied with the ‘How?’. This sort of ‘unthinking’ is what has produced the ‘optimistic’ scientism of the current times.

“A “scientific” interpretation of the world as you understand it might consequently still be one of the stupidest, that is to say, the most destitute of significance, of all possible world-interpretations:-I say this in confidence to my friends the Mechanists, who today like to hobnob with philosophers, and absolutely believe that mechanics is the teaching of the first and last laws upon which, as upon a ground-floor, all existence must be built. But an essentially mechanical world would be an essentially meaningless world! Supposing we valued the worth of a music with reference to how much it could be counted, calculated, or formulated -how absurd such a " scientific " estimate of music would be! What would one have apprehended, understood, or discerned in it! Nothing, absolutely nothing of what is really “music” in it!” Nietzsche

“One would think that neuroscientists and geneticists would have as much reason to head for the cliffs because little by little they have been finding that much of our thought and behavior is attributable to neural wiring and heredity rather than to personal control over the individuals we are, or think we are. But they do not feel suicide to be mandatory just because their laboratory experiments are informing them that human nature may be nothing but puppet nature. Not the slightest tingle of uncanniness or horror runs up and down their spines, only the thrill of discovery.” Ligotti

“Generally speaking, science has dulled people’s minds by diminishing their metaphysical consciousness.” Cioran

“If I had only to learn how an apple falls to the ground, or how an electric current shakes my nerves, I would commit suicide.” Swami Vivekananda

“To pursue science, scientists must be justified by something that, strictly speaking, is not science itself, i.e. curiosity, wonder, faith in science, the will to master all knowledge, belief thatit will benefit the world, belief in pure knowledge for its own sake, or some other breach of objectivity. Because science, apparently, cannot consistently justify itself, something else must if it is to exist at all.” Heisman

“In respect to science, which concerns us especially here in the university, the situation of the last few decades, a situation which remains unchanged today despite some cleansing, is easy to see. Although two seemingly different conceptions of science are now seemingly struggling against each other—science as technical and practical professional knowledge and science as a cultural value in itself—nevertheless both are moving along the same decadent path of a misinterpretation and disempowering of the spirit. In all its areas, science today is a technical, practical matter of gaining information and communicating it. No awakening of the spirit at all can proceed from it as science. Science itself needs such an awakening.” Heidegger

“The only question is whether we are willing to fall victim to this cheap look of things and thus take the whole matter as settled, or whether we are capable of experiencing a provocative happening in this recoil of the why-question back upon itself.” Heidegger

There is a similar criticism of ‘unthinking’ to be made against traditional ‘religious’ interpretations of the human condition. Many religious interpretations of the human experience are replete with theological assumptions that are not necessarily grounded in human experience; these take the forms of rituals, prayers, moral declarations, metaphysical claims, and so on. However, a language that prepares ‘answers’ or ‘rational defenses’ rather than opening up the mystery of the Ground of all things must be labeled as a lower form of idolatry.

These assumptions, as with many religious languages, are the reason why Heidegger proclaimed that a ‘Christian philosophy’ was the equivalent of a ‘round-square’. Heidegger’s thought is that the religious languages that have so far been developed are restrictive of the human experience in that they are attempts to go beyond said experience; any descriptions of the Other is wrongheaded.

In other words, religions and their subsequent theologies contain too many assumptions and ‘answers’ that shun the mystery of existence. Philosophy, on the other hand, as the relentless ‘Why?’, is what is needed in order to open up the mystery of Being, instead of closing it off and pushing it into a closet. One cannot turn the Other into the worldly, whether that attempt is through reason or myth. And while we are all idolaters, there are simpler, lower forms of idolatry, since they are not confrontations with Nihilism.

“So the despairing self is constantly building nothing but castles in the air, it fights only in the air. All these experimented virtues make a brilliant showing; for an instant they are enchanting like an oriental poem: such self-control, such firmness, such ataraxia, etc., border almost on the fabulous. Yes, they do to be sure; and also at the bottom of it all there is nothing. The self wants to enjoy the entire satisfaction of making itself into itself, of developing itself, of being itself; it wants to have the honor of this poetical, this masterly plan according to which it has understood itself. And yet in the last resort it is a riddle how it understands itself; just at the instant when it seems to be nearest to having the fabric finished it can arbitrarily resolve the whole thing into nothing.” Kierkegaard

“…philosophies and doctrines say almost nothing about death. the only valid attitude is absolute silence or a cry of despair. some people maintain that the fear of death does not have a deeper justification, because as long as there is an i there is no death, and once dead there is no i any longer…what comfort does this artificial distinction between the i and death offer a man who has a strong premonition of death? what meaning can logical argument or subtle thought have for someone deeply imbued with a feeling of the irrevocable? all attempts to bring existential questions onto a logical plane are null and void. philosophers are too proud to confess their fear of death and too supercilious to acknowledge the spiritual fecundity of illness. their reflections on death exhibit a hypocritical serenity; in fact, they tremble with fear more than anyone else. one should not forget that philosophy is the art of masking inner torments.” Cioran

The lack of questioning concerning the Ground of all things, as witnessed within both the scientific community and religious community is, yet, also found (maybe most astonishingly) in the philosophical community. The lack of the experience of Nihilism, the ‘intellectualizing’ and worldly perspective of most philosophers is obvious when one hears discussions on The Moral Argument for God’s existence, Pascal’s Wager, and the Allegory of the Cave, just to name a few instances.

Right away, in the first of these examples, it should be obvious that this is not to say that one must agree with the soundness of such an argument. Rather, it is that many philosophers do not grasp the ontology, or the ground, that such an argument is attempting to bring forth. The ontology of values is shown to be misunderstood when there is an epistemological response of: “I can be a good person without God”. Knowing the Good, if there were such a thing, is different from the metaphysical grounding of the Good; to not be able to make a distinction between epistemology and ontology is another example of unthinking.

“No matter how educated you are, if you don’t think intensely about death, you are a mere fool. A great scholar – if he is nothing but that – is inferior to an illiterate peasant haunted by final questions.” Cioran

“…he who hasn’t experienced a full depression alone and over a long period of time— he is a child.” Ligotti quoting Jens Bjørneboe

“One who never thinks of the hour of his death cannot make really spiritual decisions during his life. He will never be anything more than a short-sighted opportunist whose decisions will have no lasting value.” Merton

If an observer hypothesizes death then, from that perspective, the observer has no vested interests in life and thus possible grounds for the most objective view. The more an observer is reduced to nothing, the more the observer is no longer a factor, the more the observer might set the conditions for the most rigorous objectivity…It is likely that most people will not even consider the veracity of this correlation between death and objectivity even if they understand it intellectually because most will consciously or unconsciously choose to place the interests of self-preservation over the interests of objectivity. In other words, to even consider the validity of this view assumes that one is willing and able to even consider prioritizing objectivity over one’s own self-preservation. Since it not safe to simply assume this on an individual level, let alone a social level, relatively few are willing and able to seriously address this issue (and majority consensus can be expected to dismiss the issue). In short, for most people, including most “scientists”, overcoming self-preservation is not ultimately a subject for rational debate and objective discussion.” Heisman

The nightmare of existence that Pascal describes so vividly, with his unrelenting claims of the utter futility of reason, as he prefaces his ‘wager’ is inevitably turned into some strange sort of math equation concerning probabilities. I believe a quote, at length, from Pascal is not only worthy, but necessary, since it reiterates this point directly, and also lays the groundwork for the need for a further development of a Nihilistic language…

“And if besides this he is easy and content, professes to be so, and indeed boasts of it; if it is this state itself which is the subject of his joy and vanity, I have no words to describe so silly a creature. How can people hold these opinions? What joy can we find in the expectation of nothing but hopeless misery? What reason for boasting that we are in impenetrable darkness? And how can it happen that the following argument occurs to a reasonable man? “I know not who put me into the world, nor what the world is, nor what I myself am. I am in terrible ignorance of everything. I know not what my body is, nor my senses, nor my soul, not even that part of me which thinks what I say, which reflects on all and on itself, and knows itself no more than the rest. I see those frightful spaces of the universe which surround me, and I find myself tied to one corner of this vast expanse, without knowing why I am put in this place rather than in another, nor why the short time which is given me to live is assigned to me at this point rather than at another of the whole eternity which was before me or which shall come after me. I see nothing but infinites on all sides, which surround me as an atom, and as a shadow which endures only for an instant and returns no more.All I know is that I must soon die, but what I know least is this very death which I cannot escape…Such is my state, full of weakness and uncertainty. And from all this I conclude that I ought to spend all the days of my life without caring to inquire into what must happen to me. Perhaps I might find some solution to my doubts, but I will not take the trouble, nor take a step to seek it; and after treating with scorn those who are concerned with this care, I will go without foresight and without fear to try the great event, and let myself be led carelessly to death, uncertain of the eternity of my future state.” Who would desire to have for a friend a man who talks in this fashion?”

This is Pascal’s Wager. The ‘intellectuals’ who mutate Pascal’s insights into the human condition into a strange math problem concerning probabilities misses the entire environment in which the wager is put forth. This is not a casual decision made from acute calculations of ‘finite losses’ and ‘infinite gains’. That is propaganda language on Pascal’s part. As you can see from his own words above, all finitudes fall under the category of ‘lost’. There are no winners here. One cannot find what one is looking for in this nightmarish existence. This is Pascal’s Wager.

Another example is Plato’s Allegory of the Cave when it is taken as no more than ‘myth’ that has no direct correlation to reality and seen with no more ‘validity’ than any another story contained within a ‘religious’ text. For instance, with reference to Plato’s Cave, the same can be said about roller-coasters. Imagine there is a builder who constructs a roller-coaster. The builder, however, never actually steps foot on the ride. If one was to ask the builder what his roller-coaster was like, what an experience of riding the roller-coaster was like, any attempt to explain the experience, regardless of the builder’s knowledge of every dip, turn, curve, and flip, would lack any particular substance.This is the exact situation most philosophers are in when they speak of Plato’s Cave as ‘only’ a ‘myth’, while up at their ‘prestigious’ lecterns. Their lack of direct experience turns any words spewed out to be covered in ignorance at best, and dogmatism at worst. This is an empirical example of how the worldly, materialistic thinking has affected even the ones who are supposed to be the ‘questioners of truth’ on its deepest levels

As we will see when we come to our fuller discussion of mysticism and Entheogenic experiences, the cave allegory, as a transcendent reality, is not the type of thing that is ‘believed in’ or to be taken as a mere metaphor, rather it is something to be experienced first hand. When used in the proper set (environment) and setting (proper psychological preparation for participation in the experience of the Other) an uncanny world opens up that leaves any naturalistic interpretation feeling inadequate, if not utterly wrongheaded.

Without making claims about the mystical-type experience ‘proving’ a Transcendent reality, there is a correlation between the experience and the knower that may be useful for our purposes.

This sentiment may be able to be made more clear with a mentioning of ‘uncanniness’. The feeling that one is ‘at home’ here in the world is one that is the most common view of human experience. The casual nature in which humans scurry from one project to the next, one pursuit of ‘happiness’ after another, is the way the world operates on the whole. The question that a philosopher might ask is something along these lines: what is there to be ‘casual’ about with regards to flying around on a rock at 40,000 miles an hour, around a fireball ‘about’ to explode causing utter annihilation, in the ‘middle’ of a possibly endless void, in a possible infinitude of space and time?

That there are ‘miles per hour’, that there are physical ‘things’, that one has hands to type, made of what we refer to as ‘flesh’, and on and on…these are all assumptions taken as ‘normal’. That you are reading these words and that they are impregnating your brain immediately as each word, one after the other, is read. Put simply, there is nothing to be casual about. Zapffe finds this ‘casualness’ counter to the fundamental human condition. He writes: “Such a ‘feeling of cosmic panic’ is pivotal to every human mind.” Conversely, a fleeing from such panic, without any questioning of a deeper “Why?’, is also ‘pivotal’ to every human mind.

In the life-story of Buddha, one hears Kierkegaard’s echo: “Oh worldly men! how fatally deluded! beholding everywhere the body brought to dust, yet everywhere the more carelessly living; the heart is neither lifeless wood nor stone, and yet it thinks not ‘all is vanishing!’” Then turning, he directed his chariot to go back, and no longer waste his time in wandering. How could he, whilst in fear of instant death, go wandering here and there with lightened heart!”

“Certain facts of which too keen a perception would act detrimentally to the life-force are, for most men, impossible of realization: i.e. , the uncertainty of life, the decay of the body, the vanity of all things under the sun. When we are in good health, we all feel very real, solid, and permanent; and this is of all our illusions the most ridiculous, and also the most obviously useful from the point of view of the efficiency and preservation of the race.” Underhill

To overcome would be to be a god. Nietzsche’s Uberman, Kierkegaard’s Knight of Faith, Heidegger’s Equanimity, Vivekananda’s wholly unselfish being, all are ideals that cannot be reached, at least in the form of which human beings presently exist. The mystics also attempt to claim a ‘reconciliation’, but this is only done in the possibility of forgetting the human situation in their fleeting moments of ecstasy. Regardless of the validity of mystical-type experiences, which do seem to hold as a foundational element of human experience, these experiences are drowned in the experience of Nihilism. Meaninglessness subsumes mysticism. Tillich expresses this precisely as an aspect of his philosophy: “The experience of meaninglessness is more radical than mysticism. Therefore it transcends the mystical experience.”

Tillich, with all his comprehensive words on Nihilism, is still working within his brand of Christianity. This undue emphasis on worldly ‘courage’, both by himself and his readers, comes off, at best, as suspect. Is Tillich’s worldly conception of ‘courage’ only to be held by those who have only either ‘intellectualized’ Nihilism or who are attempting to flee it? Tillich’s own words suggest something is being lost in translation when he describes the role of meaninglessness as fundamental to the ‘meaning of life’:

“The answer must accept, as its precondition, the state of meaninglessness. It is not an answer if it demands the removal of this state; for that is just what cannot be done. He who is in the grip of doubt and meaninglessness cannot liberate himself from this grip but he asks for an answer which is valid within and not outside the situation of despair. He asks for the ultimate foundation of what we have called the ‘courage of despair.’ There is only one possible answer, if one does not try to escape the question; namely that the acceptance of despair is in itself faith. In this situation the meaning of life is reduced to despair about the meaning of life.”

How does one square an emphasis on ‘courage’ with the rest of Tillich’s philosophy that is built, one could argue entirely, upon despair and meaninglessness, as anything more than a conjuring illusion for everyday people? Does Tillich believe his own words? Is Tillich preaching a ‘happy’ message for the masses, instead of a ‘truth’ that he in the end holds to? As he was preaching ‘courage’, did he forget the Protestant King’s words? “God forbid! Even if God were to offer me paradise in order that I might last forty more years in this life, I wouldn’t want it. I’d rather hire a hangman to knock my head off. That’s how bad the world is now. It’s full of nothing but devils, so that one can’t with anything better than a blessed end and to get away. Nor do I bother with physicians.”

And how about Vivekananda, who Tillich shares a great part of his philosophy with? “I hate this world, this dream, this horrible nightmare with its churches and chicaneries, its books and blackguardisms, its fair faces and false hearts, its howling righteousness on the surface and utter hollowness beneath, and, above all, its sanctified shopkeeping.” Does Tillich actually believe that this ‘courage’ of facing the necessary idolatrous nature of concrete religious symbols takes priority over suicide? Is this just a facade or another example of fleeing from Nihilism? Does he truly believe in it? Or, even if all are touched by the Nihilistic experience, however lightly, is he preaching to the masses who are mostly ignorantly fleeing from the experience of Nothingness?

“See how we are flying like hunted hares from all that is terrible, and like them, hiding our heads and thinking we are safe. See how the whole world is flying from everything terrible.” Vivekananda

Ultimate skepticism and doubt are built in to the syntax of Nihilism, even in the instances of those few who have experienced something mystical and wish to interpret their experience as Transcendent. This interpretation of Nihilism is essentially locked into the human situation which is, at least in part, naturalistic. Even if one is let out of this ‘prison-house’ for a short period of recreation, one must be thrown back into the cell of the Nothing of the world; this is until death allows for a full escape into the Nothingness. As Pascal realized: “scepticism helps religion.”

“If you believe in God, you are mad without having gone mad.” Cioran

“Those who believe that they believe in God, but without any passion in their heart, without anguish of mind, without uncertainty, without doubt, without an element of despair even in their consolation, believe only in the God-Idea, not in God Himself.” Unamuno

'Who wants God? That is the question. Do you think the mass of people in the world want God and cannot get him? That cannot be…A disciple went to his master and said to him, “Sir, I want religion.” The master looked at the young man, and did not speak, but only smiled. The young man came every day, and insisted that he wanted religion. But the old man knew better than the young man. One day, when it was very hot, he asked the young man to go to the river with him and take a plunge. The young man plunged in, and the old man followed him and held the young man down under the water by force. After the young man had struggled for a while, he let him go and asked him what he wanted most while he was under the water. “A breath of air”, the disciple answered. “Do you want God in that way? If you do, you will get Him in a moment,” said the master. Until you have that thirst, that desire, you cannot get religion, however you may struggle with your intellect, or your books, or your forms. Until that thirst is awakened in you, you are no better than any atheist; only the atheist is sincere, and you are not.” Vivekananda

* * *

# Extra Notes and Quotes

“The burden is not a local one, peculiar to those first hearers, but one which is borne by the whole human race. It consists not of political oppression or poverty or hard work. It is far deeper than that. It is felt by the rich as well as the poor for it is something from which wealth and idleness can never deliver us. The burden borne by mankind is a heavy and crushing thing.” Tozer

“You may do good works all the time. All the same, you will be the slave of your senses, you will be miserable and unhappy. You may study the philosophy of every religion. Men in this country carry loads and loads of books on their backs. They are mere scholars, slaves of the senses, and therefore happy and unhappy. They read two thousand books, and that is all right; but as soon as a little misery comes, they are worried, anxious… You call yourselves men! You stand up … and build hospitals. You are fools!” Swami Vivekananda

“There is so much said now about people being offended at Christianity because it is so dark and gloomy, offended at it because it is so severe, etc. It is now high time to explain that the real reason why man is offended at Christianity is because it is too high, because its goal is not man’s goal, because it would make of a man something so extraordinary that he is unable to get it into his head.” Kierkegaard

“…anxiety- the stirring of the creature between the realms of plantlike security and spiritual risk.” Buber

