# (Unclassified) — Peter Zappfe
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- One night in long bygone times, man awoke and saw himself. He saw that he was naked under cosmos, homeless in his own body. All things dissolved before his testing thought, wonder above wonder, horror above horror unfolded in his mind. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Life had overshot its target, blowing itself apart. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- And now he can discern the outline of his biologicocosmic terms: He is the universe’s helpless captive, kept to fall into nameless possibilities. From this moment on, he is in a state of relentless panic. Such a ‘feeling of cosmic panic’ is pivotal to every human mind. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In depressive states, the mind may be seen in the image of such an antler, in all its fantastic splendour pinning its bearer to the ground. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Psychiatry even works on the assumption that the ‘healthy’ and viable is at one with the highest in personal terms. Depression, ‘fear of life,’ refusal of nourishment and so on are invariably taken as signs of a pathological state and treated thereafter. Often, however, such phenomena are messages from a deeper, more immediate sense of life, bitter fruits of a geniality of thought or feeling at the root of antibiological tendencies. It is not the soul being sick, but its protection failing, or else being rejected because it is experienced – correctly – as a betrayal of ego’s highest potential. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The craving for material goods (power) is not so much due to the direct pleasures of wealth, as none can be seated on more than one chair or eat himself more than sated. Rather, the value of a fortune to life consists in the rich opportunities for anchoring and distraction offered to the owner. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_