# (Unclassified) — Nietzsche
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- The hour when you say: _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- We have invented happiness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- One simply lacks any reason for convincing oneself that there is a true world. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- creatureliness _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- normal _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- everyday _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- for its own sake _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- le fait _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- -”man is something that is to be surpassed.” (his interpretation was 'naturalistic' and Earthly to the fullest, rather than complete renunciation of this world and complete submission to the Other.) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- A Dangerous Resolution.-The Christian resolution to find the world ugly and bad, has made the world ugly and bad. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- First, I attack only things that are triumphant-if necessary I wait until they become triumphant. Secondly, I attack only those things against which I find no allies, against which I stand alone-against which I compromise nobody but myself. ... I have not yet taken one single step before the public eye, which did not compromise me: that is my criterion of a proper mode of action. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Of actual religious difficulties, for instance, I have no experience. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Suffering it was, and impotence - that created all afterworlds; and the brief madness of bliss, which is experienced only by those who suffer most deeply. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Even in your folly and despising you each serve your self, you despisers of the body. I tell you, your very self wants to die, and turns away from life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The Everyday Christian.—If Christianity, with its allegations of an avenging God, universal sinfulness, choice of grace, and the danger of eternal damnation, were true, it would be an indication of weakness of mind and character not to be a priest or an apostle or a hermit, and toil for one's own salvation. It would be irrational to lose sight of one's eternal well being in comparison with temporary advantage: Assuming these dogmas to be generally believed, the every day Christian is a pitiable figure, a man who really cannot count as far as three, and who, for the rest, just because of his intellectual incapacity, does not deserve to be as hard punished as Christianity promises he shall be. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Religious wars only result, when human reason generally has been refined by the subtle disputes of sects ; so that even the populace becomes punctilious and regards trifles as important, actually thinking it possible that the " eternal salvation of the soul" may depend upon minute distinctions of concepts. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- my argument is that all the values on which mankind now fixes its highest aspirations are decadence-values. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- transvaluation of all values, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- true _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- not true. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- decent _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- an enemy of God, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- possessed. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Formerly it was thought that man's consciousness, his "spirit," offered evidence of his high origin, his divinity. That he might be perfected, he was advised, tortoise-like, to draw his senses in, to have no traffic with earthly things, to shuffle off his mortal coil--then only the important part of him, the "pure spirit," would remain. Here again we have thought out the thing better: to us consciousness, or "the spirit," appears as a symptom of a relative imperfection of the organism, as an experiment, a groping, a misunderstanding, as an affliction which uses up nervous force unnecessarily--we deny that anything can be done perfectly so long as it is done consciously. The "pure spirit" is a piece of pure stupidity: take away the nervous system and the senses, the so-called "mortal shell," and the rest is miscalculation--that is all! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Christianity actually denies the church. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The instinctive hatred of reality: the consequence of an extreme susceptibility to pain and irritation – so great that merely to be "touched" becomes unendurable, for every sensation is too profound. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Meanwhile, there is a contradiction between the peaceful preacher of the mount, the sea-shore and the fields, who appears like a new Buddha on a soil very unlike India's, and the aggressive fanatic, the mortal enemy of theologians and ecclesiastics... _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- What the "glad tidings" tell us is simply that there are no more contradictions; the kingdom of heaven belongs to children; the faith that is voiced here is no more an embattled faith--it is at hand, it has been from the beginning, it is a sort of recrudescent childishness of the spirit. The physiologists, at all events, are familiar with such a delayed and incomplete puberty in the living organism, the result of degeneration. A faith of this sort is not furious, it does not denounce, it does not defend itself: it does not come with "the sword"--it does not realize how it will one day set man against man. It does not manifest itself either by miracles, or by rewards and promises, or by "scriptures": it is itself, first and last, its own miracle, its own reward, its own promise, its own "kingdom of God." This faith does not formulate itself--it simply lives, and so guards itself against formulae. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- free spirit _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- life _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- life _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- light _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the world, _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- the world _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- clarify _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- A prince at the head of his armies, magnificent as the expression of the egoism and arrogance of his people--and yet acknowledging, without any shame, that he is a Christian! .. . Whom, then, does Christianity deny? what does it call "the world"? To be a soldier, to be a judge, to be a patriot; to defend one's self; to be careful of one's honour; to desire one's own advantage; to be proud . . . every act of everyday, every instinct, every valuation that shows itself in a deed, is now anti-Christian: what a monster of falsehood the modern man must be to call himself nevertheless, and without shame, a Christian! _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- In fact, there are no Christians. The "Christian"--he who for two thousand years has passed as a Christian--is simply a psychological self-delusion. Closely examined, it appears that, despite all his "faith," he has been ruled only by his instincts--and what instincts! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the "kingdom of God" is to come, with judgment upon his enemies...But in all this there was a wholesale misunderstanding: imagine the "kingdom of God" as a last act, as a mere promise! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the beyond _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- temptations, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- straight path. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- One thing only is necessary _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- immortal soul, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- salvation _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- salvation of the soul _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- the world revolves around me. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Christianity is a revolt of all creatures that creep on the ground against everything that is lofty: the gospel of the "lowly" lowers. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- religion _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- revolt _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- drowning _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- shallow _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- no reason to believe in the Divine _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Truly, he who possesses little is so much the less possessed: praised be a little poverty! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Around the inventors of new values revolves the world: - invisibly it revolves. But around the actors revolve the people and the glory: such is the course of things. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Values did man only assign to things in order to maintain himself - he created only the significance of things, a human significance! Therefore, calls he himself "man," that is, the valuator. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- He who seeks may easily get lost himself. All isolation is wrong": so say the herd. And long did you belong to the herd. The voice of the herd will still echo in you. And when you say, "I have no longer a conscience in common with you," then will it be a plaint and a pain. _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Perhaps it will follow from all this that one should form no judgments whatever; if one could but merely live without having to form estimates, without aversion and without partiality!...We are primordially illogical and hence unjust beings and can recognise this fact: this is one of the greatest and most baffling discords of existence. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Now, the great majority of mankind endure life without any great protest, and believe, to this extent, in the value of existence, but that is because each individual decides and determines alone, and never comes out of his own personality like these exceptions: everything outside of the personal has no existence for them or at the utmost is observed as but a faint shadow. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Suicide in such a case is a quite natural and due proceeding that ought to command respect as a triumph of reason: and did in fact command respect during the times of the masters of Greek philosophy and the bravest Roman patriots, who usually died by their own hand. Eagerness, on the other hand, to keep alive from day to day with the anxious counsel of physicians, without capacity to attain any nearer to one's ideal of life, is far less worthy of respect. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- This condition would not be found so bitter if the individual but compared himself freely with other men: for then he would have no reason to be discontented with himself in particular as he is merely bearing his share of the general burden of human discontent and incompleteness. But he compares himself with a being who alone must be capable of the conduct that is called unegoistic and of an enduring consciousness of unselfish motive, with God. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- We cannot possibly feel for others, as the expression goes; we feel only for ourselves. The assertion sounds hard, but it is not, if rightly understood. A man loves neither his father nor his mother nor his wife nor his child, but simply the feelings which they inspire. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- joyful universe _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- My danger is the loathing of mankind. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The perfect lucidity and cheerfulness, the intellectual exuberance even, that this work reflects, coincides, in my case, not only with the most profound physiological weakness, but also with an excess of suffering. In the midst of the agony of a headache which lasted three days, accompanied by violent nausea, I was possessed of most singular dialectical clearness, and in absolutely cold blood I then thought out things, for which, in my more healthy moments, I am not enough of a climber, not sufficiently subtle, not sufficiently cold. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To look upon healthier concepts and values from the standpoint of the sick, and conversely to look down upon the secret work of the instincts of decadence from the standpoint of him who is laden and self-reliant with the richness of life-this has been my longest exercise, my principal experience. If in anything at all, it was in this that I became a master. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- I sentenced myself to absolute solitude, and to a severance from all those conditions in life to which I had grown accustomed ; my discipline of myself, and my refusal to allow myself to be pampered, to be tended hand and foot, and to be doctored-all this betrays the absolute certainty of my instincts respecting what at that time was most needful to me. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- An intrinsically morbid nature cannot become healthy. On the other hand, to an intrinsically sound nature, illness may even constitute a powerful stimulus to life, to a surplus of life. It is in this light that I now regard the long period of illness that I endured: it seemed as if I had discovered life afresh, my own self included. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- First, I attack only things that are triumphant-if necessary I wait until they become triumphant. Secondly, I attack only those things against which I find no allies, against which I stand alone-against which I compromise nobody but myself...I have not yet taken one single step before the public eye, which did not compromise me: that is my criterion of a proper mode of action. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Did my very loathing forge me wings and the strength to scent fountains afar off? Verily to the loftiest heights did I need to fly, to find once more the spring of joyfulness. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- God," " the immortality of the soul," "salvation,"a "beyond"-to all these notions, even as a child, I never paid any attention whatsoever, nor did I waste any time upon them,-maybe I was never naif enough for that ?-I am quite unacquainted with atheism as a result, and still less as an event in my life.: in me it is inborn, instinctive. I am too inquisitive, too incredulous, too high spirited, to be satisfied with such a palpably clumsy solution of things. God is a too palpably clumsy solution of things ; a solution which shows a lack of delicacy towards us thinkers-at bottom He is really no more than a coarse and rude prohibition of us: you shall not think! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- religious life _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- If a man wish to get rid of a feeling of insufferable oppression, he has to take to hashish. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- When he has not a book between his fingers he cannot think. When he thinks, he responds to a stimulus (a thought he has read),-finally all he does is to react. The scholar exhausts his whole strength in saying either " yes " or " no " to matter which has already been thought out, or in criticising it-he is no longer capable of thought on his own account. ... In him the instinct of self-defence has decayed, otherwise he would defend himself against books. The scholar is a decadent. With my own eyes I have seen gifted, richly endowed, and free-spirited natures already " read to ruins" at thirty, and mere wax vestas that have to be rubbed before they can give off any sparks -or " thoughts." To set to early in the morning, at the break of day, in all the fullness and dawn of one's strength, and to read a book-this I call positively vicious! _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Original _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The alleviation consists in the attention of the sufferer being absolutely diverted from suffering, in the incessant monopoly of the consciousness by action, so that consequently there is little room left for suffering - for narrow is it, this chamber of human consciousness! Mechanical activity and its corollaries, such as absolute regularity, punctilious unreasoning obedience, the chronic routine of life, the complete occupation of time, a certain liberty to be impersonal, nay, a training in "impersonality," self-forgetfulness, "incuria sui no care for oneself" - with what thoroughness and expert subtlety have all these methods been exploited by the ascetic priest in his war with pain! _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- man:—SUCH men, with their "equality before God," have hitherto swayed the destiny of Europe; until at last a dwarfed, almost ludicrous species has been produced, a gregarious animal, something obliging, sickly, mediocre, the European of the present day. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Insanity in individuals is something rare—but in groups, parties, nations, and epochs it is the rule. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- The thought of suicide is a great consolation: by means of it one gets successfully through many a bad night. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_