# (Unclassified) — Martin Heidegger
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- (21-22) seems like an important part about being in itself and the 'structures' that the world, in the form of culture, throws itself onto a form, or disguise of being, which allows for the discovery of Existence to never take place, since the role of explaining existence has been taken up in the role within a particular cultures/set of values, etc. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Curiosity is 'activated' not by the endless immensity of what we have not yet seen, but rather by the falling kind of temporalizing which belongs to the present as it leaps away. Even if one has seen everything, this is precisely when the 'curiosity' fabricates something new. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Dasein gets dragged along into throwness: that is to say, as something that has been thrown into the world, it loses itself in the world in its factical submission to that with which it is to concern itself. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- To designate the authentic terminologically we have reserved the expression 'anticipation'. This indicates that Dasein, existing authentically, lets itself come towards itself as its ownmost potentiality-for-being- that the future itself must win itself, not from a Present, but from the inauthentic future. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In this, Dasein is taken back all the way to its naked uncanniness, and becomes fascinated by it. This fascination, however, not only takes Dasein back from its 'worldly' possibilities, but at the same time gives it the possibility of an authentic potentiality-for-being. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...authentic resoluteness which resolves to keep repeating itself. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- pg. 396, 198 of 294, side-note 346- Heidegger makes a distinction between the worldly hope that allows one to distract oneself with worldly pleasure/issues, i.e. a sort of band-aid, worldly 'help' and an 'ecstatico-temporal relation to the thrown ground of itself', i.e. this sounds like a mystical, entheogenic experience. _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Idle talk and curiosity take care in their ambiguity to ensure that what is genuinely and newly created is out of date as soon as it emerges before the public. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Under the mask of 'for-one-another', an 'against-one-another' is at play _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It would be a misunderstanding if we were to seek to have the explication of these phenomena confirmed by looking to the 'they' for agreement. _(REN: (Unassigned))_