# Linguistic Futility — Martin Heidegger
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- Anxiety discloses an insignificance of the world; and this insignificance reveals the nullity of that with which one can concern oneself- or, in other words, the impossibility of projecting oneself upon a potentiality-for-Being be lit up. What is the temporal meaning of this revealing? Anxiety is anxious about naked Dasein as something that has been thrown into uncanniness. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- People that have spoken of Heidegger and about Heidegger by putting his biography forth, or the particular 'clashes' or how he distances himself from a Descartes, or some other philosopher, but these commentators never speak as much, if at all, of his dismissal of both the 'biological' and 'religious' explanations of this experience of the Nothing. Heidegger refers to this sort of experience, instead, as 'existential'. Maybe that's a good word. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Read about 'Being with Others”- I think that's the title of the section. Maybe he speaks in some sort of 'value' terms. Although, in 58., Heidegger states that the concept of 'Guilty!' must 'drop' the attatchment to 'law-breaking' or an 'ought' or 'concerful being with others', i.e. guilt needs to be ridded of the 'false' morality, i.e. it seems that Heidegger understands the Nothing of this world shows the nullity of all human/worldly morality. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_