# Linguistic Futility — Herman Tønnessen
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- This, to return to the analogy, empowers the crew and passengers in the space-ship to go on, polishing brass and playing bridge, blissfully unaware of their 'cosmic situation.' They are all psychologically healthy, content, well adjusted and accommodated: ontologically secure. They have a feeling of integral selfhood, of personal identity, and of the permanency of things. They believe in their own continuity – in being made of good, lasting stuff – and in meaning and order and justice in life and in the universe. In the most fortunate cases, there is a good, healthy unconditional surrender and submission to the norms of nicety and normalcy of the average, square-headed, stuffed-shirted, sanctimonious, middle-class North-American church-goer and bridge player, with his pseudo-intelligent, quasi-progressive, simili-cultured, platitudinal small-talk. Happy days! In this the best of all possible worlds. One doesn't notice until too late. In short: All is well (since nobody notices the end of 'all that is well') until one night: the day's work is well done and all the ships' crapulant fools frantically engulf themselves in a deadly serious game of bridge (till it is time for the night-cap and the tranquillizer). One of the 'dummies,' a champion brass polisher, suffering from an acute case of uncaused depression, goes to lie down for a while; he doesn't have a dime for the jukebox; the room is painfully satiated with embarrassing silence. Instantly and unexpectedly he is struck by an execrative curse of inverted serendipity. He suddenly, in unbearable agony, sees himself as an upholstered pile of bones and knuckles, with the softer parts slung up in a bad on the front side, and his whole like as a ludicrously brief interlude between embryo and corpse, two repulsive caricatures of himself. As for this flying farce, this nauseatingly trivial burlesque in a whirling coffin, and its aimless, whimsical flight through the void: 'What is it all about?' The question permeates him with dread and anguish, with 'ontological despair' and 'existential frustration.' 'Angsten' (Kierkegaard) constrains out of him all his puny, piddling hatreds, and petty ambitions in brass and bridge, and fills him with care and compassion for his fellow travelers. In other words, he has become a philosopher, an alienated, nostalgic 'cosmopath,' and, eo ipso, a case for psychologists and psychotherapists, some of whom want to study him and label his 'Daseinsweise,' others to 'unsick' him as well. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Ordinary language...it lulls us into this platitudinal world of small-talk where everything is taken for granted: life, death, the world, and man's fate in it, the society, the language. No reason to wonder or worry; everything is what it is and not another thing. The world is what it seems to be to a dry, unimaginative, down to earth, square-headed stuffshirt about mid-morning after a good night's rest. And as for such questions as what it means to live and die – there's nothing to it, it is commonplace, almost everybody does it. We are thrown into an absurdly indifferent world of sticks and stones and stars and emptiness. Our “situation _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- There is a nagging suspicion that the diagnostics are exploiting Heidegger's exotic language in order to “keep talking, _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- He may be paying lip-service to the idea of humanization while at the same time surreptitiously practicing suffocation by exploiting the traditional ontological hebetants: work, religion, metaphysics, alcohol, drugs, lobotomy, everydayness, noseyness, external sensations, ordinary language prose, platitudinal small-talk, or chatter, role-playing, role experiences, social norms, rigidity, insanity or conformity. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the chances are Zapffe (rather than being cured) would be baffled by Frankl's sophomoric philosophizing. 'You may be psychologically healthier than I,' Zapffe would gladly admit, 'but I must insist that I am a better philosopher. A lifelong search for a meaning in life in general, and of my life in particular, has led me – reluctantly, but with cataclysmic consistency and sleepwalker's certainty – to realize that it's all fantasy and delusions, divinely subsidized to put us at peace with our situation. You are certainly right that psycho-pathological explanations of my biosophical pessimism would be totally irrelevant; but I also fail to see what you can accomplish with your naive, maladroit metaphysics, behind which – if you will permit me to speak your language for once – I see but the profoundest, most fundamental trauma, and that the great universal repression which prevents all fatal insight into man and his cosmic conditions, the mysterious, grotesquely absurd origin and genesis of body and mind, their inalienable interests, and their final and complete obliteration, the return to the synthesis to the absolute zero. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- If a student has difficulties in getting to the university because of their fear of stepping on cracks in the pavement, this is not a problem to be taken seriously or the cognitive level; in other words, it doesn't raise the problem: 'is it really dangerous to step on cracks in the pavement?' It is quite a different story if the student has 'working inhibitions,' because he has struck against the stark problem of death and annihilation. His stomach is clawed to shreds, his breathing throttled by the anguish of nothingness, the dread of being no more. His behavior, his feelings, and emotions may deviate so far from what is presently considered customary that there is no question of their abnormality, in at least one possible sense of 'abnormality.' But his reasons for the 'deviation' may not be troubles in adjusting to narrow 'social' aspects of his environment, as is the case with our first student, but caused by the unusual awakening to a clear and penetrating awareness of a vast 'cosmic' environment to which there is no adjustment possible. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Thrown into an eternally changing universe, human beings cannot be tied by a set of rigid rules for language, thought, or action. _(REN: (Unassigned))_