# Linguistic Futility — Mitchell Heisman
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- Music could be a form of emotional technology to control my own behavior intelligently. In other words, if emotions are the products of material processes, then art could be viewed as a form of _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- It is likely that most people will not even consider the veracity of this correlation between death and objectivity even if they understand it intellectually because most will consciously or unconsciously choose to place the interests of self-preservation over the interests of objectivity. In other words, to even consider the validity of this view assumes that one is willing and able to even consider prioritizing objectivity over one’s own self-preservation. Since it not safe to simply assume this on an individual level, let alone a social level, relatively few are willing and able to seriously address this issue (and majority consensus can be expected to dismiss the issue). In short, for most people, including most “scientists _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “To pursue science, scientists must be justified by something that, strictly speaking, is not science itself, i.e. curiosity, wonder, faith in science, the will to master all knowledge, belief that _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Even once one has decided on some facet of reality, there is still the problem of interpretation. Consider the interpretation that my interpretation is just a way of throwing order upon the chaos of the world. Is this interpretation itself a just a way of throwing order on the chaos of the world? Even the word “chaos _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Every word, every thought, and every emotion come back to one core problem: life is _(REN: (Unassigned))_