# Ontological Abyss — Ernest Becker
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- doesn’t feel that he will die, he only feels sorry for the man next to him.” (Vivekananda- 'everyday people are dying around us, and yet men think they will never die', Maya, the path is narrow, Tolstoy and the farce of the 'individual life', i.e. as nothing) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- It doesn’t matter whether the cultural hero-system is frankly magical, religious, and primitive or secular, scientific, and civilized. It is still a mythical hero-system in which people serve in order to earn a feeling of primary value, of cosmic specialness, of ultimate usefulness to creation, of unshakable meaning. They earn this feeling by carving out a place in nature, by building an edifice that reflects human value: a temple, a cathedral, a totem pole, a skyscraper, a family that spans three generations. The hope and belief is that the things that man creates in society are of lasting worth and meaning, that they outlive or outshine death and decay, that man and his products count. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “As Montaigne said, the peasant has a profound indifference and a patience toward death _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “The knowledge of death is reflective and conceptual, and animals are spared it. They live and they disappear with the same thoughtlessness: a few minutes of fear, a few seconds of anguish, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Mans body is a problem to him that has to be explained. Not only his body is strange, but also its inner landscape, the memories and dreams. Mans very insides—his self—are foreign to him. He doesn't know who he is, why he was born, what he is doing on the planet, what he is supposed to do, what he can expect. His own existence is incomprehensible to him, a miracle just like the rest of creation, closer to him, right near his pounding heart, but for that reason all the more strange. Each thing is a problem, and man can shut out nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- new experience so quickly that he will burst; make him stick out among others, emerge onto dangerous ground, load him up with new responsibilities which need great strength to bear, expose him to new contingencies, new chances. Above all there is the danger of a slip-up, an accident, a chance disease, and of course of death, the final sucking up, the total submergence and negation.” (It feels as thought my self-induced seclusion and use of cannabis has become too overwhelming for me) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- This despair he avoids by building defenses; and these defenses allow him to feel a basic sense of self-worth, of meaningfulness, of power. They allow him to feel that he controls his life and his death, that he really does live and act as a willful and free individual, that he has a unique and self-fashioned identity, that he is somebody not just a trembling accident germinated on a hothouse planet that Carlyle for all time called a 'hall of doom.' _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ...we could understand something the poets and religious geniuses have long known: that the armor of character was so vital to us that to shed it meant to risk death and madness. It is not hard to reason out: If character is a neurotic defense against despair and you shed that defense, you admit the full flood of despair, the full realization of the true human condition, what men are really afraid of, what they struggle against, and are driven toward and away from. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “It was Rank who very early admitted that anxiety could not all be overcome therapeutically, and this is what he meant: that it is impossible to stand up to the terror of one's condition without _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- anxiety.” (Tillich, Kierkegaard, but not Vivekananda. Well, Vivekananda says this is some parts, while in others makes it seem as if there is a 'mysticism' that rises 'above' anxiety. I think Vivekananda does not believe this, since you cannot live in a 'nightmare' without anxiety. It's an ideal, but not a reality for humans: an anxiety free existence, Vivekanada's 'bliss' is an ideal as Kierkegaard's Knight of Faith is, i.e. an impossibility inside of the human condition) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- It can’t be overstressed, one final time, that to see the world as it really is is devastating and terrifying...It makes thoughtless living in the world of men an impossibility. It places a trembling animal at the mercy of the entire cosmos and the problem of the meaning of it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The tragedy of life that Searles is referring to is the one we have been discussing: mans finitude, his dread of death and of the overwhelmingness of life. The schizophrenic feels these more than anyone else because he has not been able to build the confident defenses that a person normally uses to deny them. The schizophrenic's misfortune is that he has been burdened with extra anxieties, extra guilt, extra helplessness, an even more unpredictable and unsupportive environment. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “We see again confirmed the point of view that a persons character is a defense against despair, an attempt to avoid insanity because of the real nature of the world. Searles looks at schizophrenia precisely as the result of the inability to shut out terror, as a desperate style of living with terror. Frankly I don’t know anything more cogent that needs to be said about this syndrome: it is a _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The irony of mans condition is that the deepest need is to be free of the anxiety of death and annihilation; but it is life itself which awakens it, and so we must shrink from being fully alive. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Man emerged from the instinctive thoughtless action of the lower animals and came to reflect on his condition. He was given a consciousness of his individuality and his part-divinity in creation, the beauty and uniqueness of his face and his name. At the same time he was given the consciousness of the terror of the world and of his own death and decay. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “...the final terror of self-consciousness is the knowledge of one’s own death, which is the peculiar sentence on man alone in the animal kingdom. This is the meaning of the Garden of Eden myth and the rediscovery of modem psychology: that death is man s peculiar and _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- This is precisely the condition of depression, that one can hardly breathe or move. One of the unconscious tactics that the depressed person resorts to, to try to make sense out of his situation, is to see himself as immensely worthless and guilty. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...the depressed person avoids the possibility of independence and more life precisely because these are what threaten him with destruction and death. He holds on to the people who have enslaved him in a network of crushing obligations, belittling interaction, precisely because these people are his shelter, his strength, his protection against the world. Like most everyone else the depressed person will not stand alone on his own center, who cannot draw from within himself the necessary strength to face up to life. So he embeds himself in others; he is sheltered by the necessary and willingly accepts it. But now his tragedy is plain to see: his necessity has become trivial, and so his slavish, dependent, depersonalized life has lost its meaning. It is frightening to be in such a bind. One chooses slavery because it is safe and meaningful; then one loses the meaning of it. but fears to move out of it. One has literally died to life but must remain physically in this world. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The ugly side of this Promethianism is that it, too, is thoughtless, an empty-headed immersion in the delights of technics with no thought to goals or meaning; so man performs on the moon by hitting golf balls that do not swerve in the lack of atmosphere. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Kierkegaard's torment was the direct result of seeing the world as it really is in relation to his situation as a creature. The prison of one’s character is painstakingly built; to deny one thing and one thing alone: one’s creatureliness. The creatureliness is the terror. Once admit that you are a defecating creature and you invite the primeval ocean of creature anxiety to flood over you. But it is more than creature anxiety, it is also man’s anxiety, the anxiety that results from the human paradox that man is an animal who is conscious of his animal limitation. Anxiety is the result of the perception of the truth of one’s condition. What does it mean to be a self-conscious animal? The idea is ludicrous, if it is not monstrous. It means to know that one is food for worms. This is the terror: to have emerged from nothing, to have a name, consciousness of self, deep inner feelings, an excruciating inner yearning for life and self-expression—and with all this yet to die. It seems like a hoax, which is why one type of cultural man rebels openly against the idea of God. What kind of deity would create such complex and fancy worm food? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- The flood of anxiety is not the end for man. It is, rather, a “school _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Education for man means facing up to his natural impotence and death. As Luther urged us: “I say die, i.e., taste death as though it were present. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- What Kierkegaard is saying, in other words, is that the school of anxiety leads to possibility _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- ...by the destruction of the self through facing up to the anxiety of the terror of existence. The self must be destroyed, brought down to nothing, in order for self-transcendence to begin. Then the self can begin to relate itself to powers beyond itself. It has to thrash around in its finitude, it has to “die _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- One goes through it all to arrive at faith, the faith that one s very creatureliness has some meaning to a Creator; that despite one’s true insignificance, weakness, death, one’s existence has meaning in some ultimate sense because it exists within an eternal and infinite scheme of things brought about and maintained to some kind of design by some creative force. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- We can understand why anxiety “is the possibility of freedom, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- He links his secret inner self, his authentic talent, his deepest feelings of uniqueness, his inner yearning for absolute significance, to the very ground of creation. Out of the ruins of the broken cultural self there remains the mystery of the private, invisible, inner self which yearned for ultimate significance, or cosmic heroism. This invisible mystery at the heart of every creature now attains cosmic significance by affirming its connection with the invisible mystery at the heart of creation. This is the meaning of faith. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Despite all his leanings toward the idea of death, the hopeless situation of the child, the real terror of the external world, and the like, Freud did not need to give them a central place in his thought. He did not need to rework his vision of man from that of primarily a pleasure-seeker of sex to that of the terrified, death-avoiding animal. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- “Sometimes just to admit an idea to consciousness is to experience that idea vitally. At other times to admit even a deep anxiety may not mean the actual experience of that anxiety, at _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- least not the deep experience of it, as something else may be troubling the person. Psychoanalysts talk about anxiety without affect. Can one admit the terror of death and still not experience it _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- We saw that the child stands right at the crossroads of the human dualism. He discovers that he has a fallible body, and he is learning that there is a whole cultural world-view that will permit him to triumph over it. The questions about sex that the child asks are thus not— at a fundamental level—about sex at all. They are about the meaning of the body, the terror of living with a body. When the parents give a straightforward biological answer to sexual questions, they do not answer the child’s question at all. He wants to know why he has a body, where it came from, and what it means for a self-conscious creature to be limited by it. He is asking about the ultimate mystery of life, not about the mechanics of sex. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- We feel diminished by their human shortcomings. Our interiors feel empty or anguished, our lives valueless, when we see the inevitable pettinesses of the world expressed through the human beings in it. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- empty, weaklings. To renounce the world and oneself, to lay the meaning of it to the powers of creation is the hardest thing for man to achieve—and so it's fitting that this task should fall to the _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Do Freud and others imagine that surrender to God is masochistic, that to empty oneself is demeaning? Well, answers Rank, it represents on the contrary the furthest reach of the self, the highest idealization man can achieve. It represents the fulfillment of the Agape love-expansion, the achievement of the truly creative type. Only in this way, says Rank, only by surrendering to the bigness of nature on the highest, least-fetishized level, can man conquer death. In other words, the true heroic validation of one’s life lies beyond sex, beyond the other, beyond the private religion—all these are makeshifts that pull man down or that hem him in, leaving him torn with ambiguity. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Nihiltheism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “Gods can take in the whole of creation because they alone can make sense of it, know what it is all about and for. But as soon as a man lifts his nose from the ground and starts sniffing at eternal problems like life and death, the meaning of a rose or a star cluster—then he is in trouble. Most men spare themselves this trouble by keeping their minds on the small problems of their lives _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “It is one thing to ritually wash one’s hands three times; it is another to wash them until the hands bleed and one is in the bathroom most of the day. Here we see in pure culture, as it were, what is at stake in all human repression: the fear of life and death. Safety in the face of the real _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- There are those who shrink back from experience out of greater life-and-death anxieties. They grow up not giving themselves freely to the cultural roles available to them. They can’t lose themselves thoughtlessly in the games that others play. One reason is that they have trouble relating to others; they haven’t been able to develop the necessary interpersonal skills. Playing the game of society with automatic ease means playing with others without anxiety. If you are not involved in what others take for granted as the nourishment of their lives, then your own life becomes a total problem. At its extreme this describes the schizoid type par excellence. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- the symptom or a bogging down in guilt and futility because of an unlived life. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- We have seen that what we call the human character is actually a lie about the nature of reality. The causa-sui project is a pretense that one is invulnerable because protected by the power of others and of culture, that one is important in nature and can do something about the world. But in back of the causa-sui project whispers the voice of possible truth: that human life may not be more than a meaningless interlude in a vicious drama of flesh and bones that we call evolution; that the Creator may not care any more for the destiny of man or the self-perpetuation of individual men than He seems to have cared for the dinosaurs or the Tasmanians. The whisper is the same one that slips incongruously out of the Bible in the voice of Ecclesiastes: that all is vanity, vanity of vanities. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- illusions about it, which proves nothing less than, that life is possible only with illusions.” (Ha!) _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- the larger sense, a problem of the eclipse of secure communal ideologies of redemption.” (the nightmare of existence does not get solved, Zapffe- 'sure you may be in a 'better' psychological state than me, but I am the better philosopher. Man's Search for Meaning sucks, since it denies the truth of the nightmare of existence and attempts to put forth a knowingly subjective, worthless illusion as 'truth' or 'worth living for') _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Here Rank and Kierkegaard meet in one of those astonishing historical mergers of thought: that sin and neurosis are two ways of talking about the same thing—the complete isolation of the individual, his disharmony with the rest of nature, his hyperindividualism, his attempt to create his own world from within himself. Both sin and neurosis represent the individual blowing himself up to larger than his true size, his refusal to recognize his cosmic dependence. Neurosis, like sin, is an attempt to force nature, to pretend that the causa-sui project really suffices. In sin and neurosis man fetishizes himself on something narrow at hand and pretends that the whole meaning and miraculousness of creation is limited to that, that he can get his beatification. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- I am nothing. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- vis-a-vis God, who alone can make it right in His unknown ways; it is another thing to be nothing to oneself, who is nothing.” _(REN: 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The customs and myths of traditional society provided a whole interpretation of the meaning of life, ready-made for the individual; all he had to do was to accept living it as true. The modern neurotic must do just this if he is to be “cured _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- himself and has nothing to lean on, no collective drama that makes fantasy seem real because it is lived and shared.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- To judge by his own self-accusations of worthlessness, the patient feels an immense burden of guilt. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- There is a type of person for whom life is a more insurmountable problem than for others, for whom the burden of anxiety and fear is almost as constant as his daily breath. Rank used the term “neurotic _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- and ability of others; nothing seems to him to be able to overcome the inevitable horrors of life and death—except perhaps the fantastic ideational system that he fabricates for his own salvation.” (Ha! That sounds just like me and haas) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- hospitals attest. An impoverished and powerless person—even when he is a perceiver of truth—has no gift to offer to his fellows or to himself. The uncreative psychotic is simply totally crippled by life-and-death fears.” (I always wanted to be more creative. This would make the earthly world easier; and who says that an 'easier' existence is to be pursued? To avoid pain and fear? Ha! Weak and pathetic us human creatures are! Avoid because I don't like feeling a particular way. Just an arbitrary sensation? Naturalism) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- In schizophrenia, like depression, we see the problem of heroics in its stark nudity. How does one become a hero from a position in which he has hardly any resources at all?—a position from which he sees more clearly than anyone else the menacing dangers of life and death and yet has no solid feeling of inner glory to oppose to them? He has to fabricate such a feeling in the best way he can, which will be a clumsy, crippled, and inverted way. No wonder that psychotic transferences are so total, so intense, so all-absorbing, so frightening (when they are not pathetic). _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- especially sensitive it seems more than puzzling, it is disheartening.” (this is the absurd perspective, the problem of relativism/nihilism that is not seen by every one because they have been raised within the relativistic/nihilistic framework, nothing weird about everyone having a different opinion/not being able to find out who's right, if anyone is, and yet not figuring out that all your moral/important demands and judgments are just as nonsensical as the person that you oppose, since there is no way to find out who is right, how come everyone doesn't find this weird?) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- He accepts whatever happens in this visible dimension without complaint, lives his life as a duty, faces his death without a qualm. No pettiness is so petty that it threatens his meanings; no task is too frightening to be beyond his courage. He is fully in the world on its terms and wholly beyond the world in his trust in the invisible dimension. It is very much the old Pietistic ideal that was lived by Kants parents. The great strength of such an ideal is that it allows one to be open, generous, courageous, to touch others' lives and enrich them and open them in turn. As the knight of faith has no fear-of-life-and- death trip to lay onto others, he does not cause them to shrink back upon themselves, he does not coerce or manipulate them. The knight of faith, then, represents what we might call an ideal of mental health, the Continuing openness of life out of the 'death throes of dread'. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- For every shortcoming that we can point to in Freud, we can find a corresponding one in Kierkegaard. If Freud can be said to have erred on the side of the visible, then Kierkegaard can surely be said to have equally erred on the side of the invisible. He turned away from life partly from his fear of life, he embraced death more easily because he had failed in life; his own life was not a voluntary sacrifice undertaken in free will, but a pathetically driven sacrifice. He did not live in the categories in which he thought. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “I am talking matter-of-factly about some of the surest giants in the history of humanity only to say that in the game of life and death no one stands taller than any other, unless it be a true saint, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- ...led Tillich to argue so penetratingly that Eastern mysticism is not for Western man. It is an evasion of the courage to be; it prevents the absorption of maximum meaninglessness into oneself. Tillich s point is that mystical experience seems to be near to perfect faith but is not. Mysticism lacks precisely the element of skepticism, and skepticism is a more radical experience, a more manly confrontation of potential meaninglessness. Even more, we must not forget that much of the time, mysticism as popularly practised is fused with a sense of magical omnipotence: it is actually a manic defense and a denial of creatureliness. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- Danger: real probability of the awakening of terror and dread, from which there is no turning back. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- from beyond. How can the person be left there trembling and alone? Offer him the possibility of mystical contact with the void of creation, the power of “It,” his likeness to God, or at the very _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- The problem of meaninglessness is the form in which nonbeing poses itself in our time... _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- this planet has to be done in the lived truth of the terror of creation, of the grotesque, of the rumble of panic underneath everything. Otherwise it is false.” (Tillich, which is why 'mysticism' is not the 'stopping point', it is a guide, but it does not overpower the experience of Meaninglessness, Nihilism) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_