# Ontological Abyss — Mitchell Heisman
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- “The following is an experiment in nihilism. Already I have contradicted myself! How can one believe in disbelief? I might be a nihilist except that I don’t believe in anything. If there is no extant God and no extant gods, no good and no evil, no right and no wrong, no meaning and no purpose; if there are no values that are inherently valuable; no justice that is ultimately justifiable; no reasoning that is fundamentally rational, then there is no sane way to choose _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- between science, religion, racism, philosophy, nationalism, art, conservatism, nihilism, liberalism, surrealism, fascism, asceticism, egalitarianism, subjectivism, elitism, ismism.” _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “If reason is incapable of deducing ultimate, nonarbitrary human ends, and nothing can be judged as ultimately more important than anything else, then freedom is equal to slavery; cruelty is equal to kindness; love is equal to hate; war is equal to peace; dignity is equal to contempt; _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- destruction is equal to creation; life is equal to death and death is equal to life.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Can one live a philosophy of the nihilistic, reconciling meaninglessness with every thought and emotion at every moment? If active unbelief were the highest organizing principle of a life, would the consequence be rational self-destruction? Could suicide represent the pinnacle of the rational life realized? _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Nihilism is where science and philosophy meet. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Nihilism could be interpreted as the inherent paradox of living a belief in disbelief. So called “nihilism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- justification for belief in the authority of one’s instincts and emotions, and, lack of justification for belief that God exists.” (the seeming difference between Nihilism and skepticism) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Willing death is, then, an attempt to live a nihilistic life. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “If no values are inherently valuable, then life has no inherent value. If life has no inherent purpose, then its end could be directed towards its negation or death. Death could be posited as the highest value. Since the other secular values are premised upon life, death is the test of all the _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The implications of life’s meaninglessness have not been elicited with sufficient ruthlessness. My methodology is honesty to the point of absurdity; honesty without mercy; honesty unprejudiced by morals, aesthetics, faith, or hope. When all illusions have been dispelled, at the end of overcoming subjectivities, biases, and prejudices towards life, one encounters the possibility of rational negation of self-interest; rational self-annihilation; rational self-destruction. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out precisely those truths that are most deadly and destructive to me. To will death through truth and truth through death. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “When all choices are equal, equality is compatible with total randomness. If all choices are equal, then the choice of death is equal to the choice of life. If life is meaningless, then God _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- is nothing. But a funny thing happened on the way to nihilistic self-destruction. It was precisely through radical disbelief that I discovered an evolutionary basis for God. Most secular people in the West are simply not ruthless enough in their nihilism to vivisect belief to death. Yet vivisecting belief to death exposes how the original monotheistic conception of God likely arose out of ruthless realism. Monotheism may have originated out of a skeptical, nihilistic, materialistic _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Perhaps the whole experiment in nihilism is a failure simply because I somehow managed to make it too meaningful. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Nihilism turns out to be more paradoxical than I first thought. The Singularity does not refute nihilism, but rather, “God _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Psychological explanations can be used, not only to evade the nihilistic, but to evade the scientific equation of the larger material world with a material view of one’s own mind — and thus to misunderstand the problem. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- “When I say that I do not believe in my emotions, I don’t meant that I don’t have them; I mean that I do not accord them any ultimate meaning or significance. Darwin’s The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals demonstrates why: emotions and instincts are the product of _(REN: 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- experiment in nihilism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “The experiment in nihilism is a test of what I really do or do not believe. If it is the case that emotions are former genetic adaptations or illusions of an evolutionary inheritance, the chance products of a particular course of natural selection, then there is no reason to assume that they _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- alternatives, then all choices are equal and there is no fundamental ground for choosing life over death.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- Liberals are not at all fully nihilistic. In part, there is the practical belief in values vaguely corresponding to human rights. But more fundamentally, “secularists _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- believe in a religion of the common emotions. They generally believe that meaning is to be found in the material, biochemical processes that humans experience as emotions.” _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- For some, the meaninglessness gleaned from a scientific view of life leads to nausea, angst, and nihilistic despair. I reject this attitude on the grounds that nausea, angst, and nihilistic despair also originate in material reactions in the brain. What does despair mean to someone who interprets that emotion as a chemical reaction in the brain? The process of disillusionment can also be disillusioned and de-aestheticized. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “What is closest to total indifference is to be dead. If an observer hypothesizes death then, from that perspective, the observer has no vested interests in life and thus possible grounds for _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- the most objective view. The more an observer is reduced to nothing, the more the observer is no longer a factor, the more the observer might set the conditions for the most rigorous objectivity.” (selflessness) _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is likely that most people will not even consider the veracity of this correlation between death and objectivity even if they understand it intellectually because most will consciously or unconsciously choose to place the interests of self-preservation over the interests of objectivity. In other words, to even consider the validity of this view assumes that one is willing and able to even consider prioritizing objectivity over one’s own self-preservation. Since it not safe to simply assume this on an individual level, let alone a social level, relatively few are willing and able to seriously address this issue (and majority consensus can be expected to dismiss the issue). In short, for most people, including most “scientists _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “By simply changing my values from life values to death values, and setting my trajectory for rational biological self-destruction, I am able to liberate myself from many of the biases that _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- that other observers are not willing to prioritize objectivity over the bias of self-preservation?” (jean amery speaks of the 'logic of life' and the 'logic of death' which is why he thinks that most psychological theories have 'some truth' to them, but they all hinge of an unjustified preference for life) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- My objective is to kill myself. Now how can I explain this? If reason cannot determine ultimate values, then how do I explain the facts of my values? I can begin to explain myself through the Nietzschean distinction between truth and life. It is a modern delusion to believe that pursuit of truth has any necessary correspondence with life-affirming values. To not gloss over the forks between these paths with myths and compromises, but to confront them openly, directly, and as far as possible, without illusion, can lead to the path of truth and death. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “The attempt to fully include one’s self in one’s own theory can never, it seems, be achieved. However, the attempt to approach this state amounts to a process of rational self-destruction because, in order to approach objectivity, the elimination of subjectivity must proceed, and the elimination of all self-interest approaches the elimination of biases of life over death. Rational self-destruction that culminates in death is correlated with the most thorough attempt at _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- is nothing. An experiment in nihilism, I am destroying all values that uphold life until I am left with nowhere to stand.” (this is renunciation, this is what I am doing) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- “When all choices are equal, equality is compatible with total randomness. If all choices are equal, then the choice of death is equal to the choice of life. If life is meaningless, then God is nothing. (this is above, but important enough to stand out as a repeat) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- When my father died when I was twelve, I dealt with his death by interpreting him as a purely material phenomenon. In other words, I viewed my father as a material thing and his death as a material process. Well before my father died, I had interpreted my own emotions as material processes and my reaction to my father’s death was treated no differently. If I treat myself and understand myself by the standard of physical materialism, there is no reason why I should not do the same to others who, by the same Darwinistic understanding of life, are also physical material. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- “Disillusioned of belief in my own subjective experiences, at rock bottom, I turned to completely destroy myself. If life itself is without ultimate meaning, and is not fundamentally _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- rationally superior to death, then perhaps the test of the worth of life is found in willing death and self-destruction.” _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- of my point of view. Psychological explanations can be used, not only to evade the nihilistic, but to evade the scientific equation of the larger material world with a material view of one’s own mind — and thus to misunderstand the problem.” (the idea of 'mental illness' not being what it is normally defined as. Tillich makes this distinction, as does Becker, e.g. what could psychotherapy possibly say to the Nihilist? Nihilism is seeing the world correctly, happiness is for the pigs, Zapffe all say this) _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- The most consistent physicalism, a physicalism that makes no exceptions whatsoever for subjective experiences such as instincts, intuitions, and emotions, leads to rational self-destruction or rational death. Self-consistent materialism leads to interpreting every subjective experience, i.e. fear, love, inspiration, dreams, etc., as physical matter. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- nihilism _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- take their starting point with a bias towards existence, to criticize this bias is to take a starting that is open to the possibility of death.” (Amery) _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- meaningless. The experiment in nihilism is to seek out and expose every illusion and every myth, wherever it may lead, no matter what, even if it kills us.” _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Nihilism, noted Friedrich Nietzsche, “represents the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and ideals _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_