# Ontological Abyss — Albert Camus
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- gestures, their meaningless pantomime makes silly everything that surrounds them. A man is talking on the telephone behind a glass partition; you cannot hear him, but you see his _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- We must despair of ever reconstructing the familiar, calm surface which would give us peace of heart. After so many centuries of inquiries, so many abdications among thinkers, we are well aware that this is true for all our knowledge. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- For him (Kierkegaard), too, antinomy and paradox become criteria of the religious. Thus, the very thing that led to despair of the meaning and depth of this life now gives it its truth and its clarity. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- “Nothing more profound, for example, than Kierkegaard's view according to which despair is not a fact but a state: the very state of sin. For sin is what alienates from God. The absurd, which _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- If man had no eternal consciousness, if, at the bottom of everything, there were merely a wild, seething force producing everything, both large and trifling, in the storm of dark passions, if the bottomless void that nothing can fill underlay all things, what would life be but despair? _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- despair. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The absurd man thus catches sight of a burning and frigid, transparent and limited universe in which nothing is possible but everything is given, and beyond which all is collapse and nothingness. He can then decide to accept such a universe and draw from it his strength, his refusal to hope, and the unyielding evidence of a life without consolation. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- (Kafka) His work is universal (a really absurd work is not universal) to the extent to which it represents the emotionally moving face of a man fleeing humanity, deriving from his contradictions reasons fro believing, reasos for hoping from his fecund despairs, and calling life his terrifying apprenticeship in death. It is universal because its inspiration is religious. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 2. Abyssal Experience)_