# Ontological Abyss — John Shelby Spong
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- ...consciousness became self-consciousness and awareness became self-awareness...What was it like in the creatures in whom this new reality was dawning over whatever number of years it took to become the norm?...It was probably both a startling wonder and a traumatic moment of fear and enormous anxiety. I suspect these first of our human ancestors shook in their skin at the new vision of what life had become and all that it now entailed. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- It is one thing to be unaware that your existence has no meaning...it is quite another to deal with that reality consciously and to battle against it. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Human beings...they will die and are aware that they will disappear...No other living thing before us has ever been required to embrace this level of anxiety. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- It means that if life has no ultimate meaning, we alone of all other creatures embrace the threat of meaninglessness. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- The fires of anxiety, born in self-consciousness, are thus banked by religion and we are content, if not grateful, to live inside the theistic definition of God that we created. Theism, therefore, is not who God is. Theism is a human definition of who God is. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- The sings of the death of a theistic understanding of God are all around us. Many of us will not allow ourselves to see them, because we have no alternative and would rather live with an illusion than try to embrace reality. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- Many forms of religion are little more than cultural manifestations of the fear of nothingness. That is why people become hysterical when theism is challenged. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- All of these stories from the New Testament make it clear that the meaning of the Jesus experience was that he empowered others to lay down their survival barriers, to step beyond tribe, beyond language, beyond the fear-imposed levels of our security. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- It is an act of enormous courage to embrace what it means to be a self-conscious human being. It is not easy to live with the awareness of the unrelieved anxiety that is the mark of human life. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_