# Ontological Abyss — Thomas Ligotti
## Quotes (REN-tagged)
- One would think that neuroscientists and geneticists would have as much reason to head for the cliffs because little by little they have been finding that much of our thought and behavior is attributable to neural wiring and heredity rather than to personal control over the individuals we are, or think we are. But they do not feel suicide to be mandatory just because their laboratory experiments are informing them that human nature may be nothing but puppet nature. Not the slightest tingle of uncanniness or horror runs up and down their spines, only the thrill of discovery. Most of them reproduce and do not believe there is anything questionable in doing so. If they could get a corpse to sit up on an operating table, they would jubilantly exclaim, “It’s alive! _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- In experiencing the uncanny, there is a feeling of wrongness...Of course, our internal authority may itself be in the wrong, perhaps because it is a fabrication of consciousness based on a body of laws that are written only within us and not a detector of what is right or wrong in any real sense, since nothing really is right or wrong in any real sense. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- One day those shoes on the floor of your clothes closet may attract your eye in a way they never have before. Somehow they have become abstracted from your world, appearances you cannot place, lumps of matter without a fixed quality and meaning. You feel confused as you stare at them. What are they? What is their nature? Why should there be something rather than nothing? _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- In perfect knowledge there is only perfect nothingness, which is perfectly painful if what you want is meaning in your life. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- It is all a vacuous affair with only a chemical prestige. Nothing is either good or bad, desirable or undesirable, or anything else except that it is made so by laboratories inside us producing the emotions on which we live. And to live on our emotions is to live arbitrarily, inaccurately— imparting meaning to what has none of its own. Yet what other way is there to live? Without the ever-clanking machinery of emotion, everything would come to a standstill. There would be nothing to do, nowhere to go, nothing to be, and no one to know. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Because no two minds are contoured alike, no one system or collocation of systems will ever be sized to fit all. If truth is what you seek, then the examined life will only take you on a long ride to the limits of solitude and leave you by the side of the road with your truth and nothing else. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- ...ego-death is a state that has nothing but anecdotal evidence to support it, which groups this phenomenon with mystical experiences and revealed religions. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- And once our egos have been deposed, what would be left of us? By all recorded accounts, everything would be left except what Horwitz called “a vanity, an elaborate delusion, a ruse. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- In his best-known work, The Denial of Death (1973), Becker wrote: “I believe that those who speculate that a full apprehension of man’s condition would drive him insane are right, quite literally right. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ...the universe as nothing in motion. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- Any kind of existence is useless. Nothing is self-justifying. Everything is justified only in a relativistic potato-masher sense. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- One would think that neuroscientists and geneticists would have as much reason to head for the cliffs because little by little they have been finding that much of our thought and behavior is attributable to neural wiring and heredity rather than to personal control over the individuals we are, or think we are. But they do not feel suicide to be mandatory just because their laboratory experiments are informing them that human nature may be nothing but puppet nature. Not the slightest tingle of uncanniness or horror runs up and down their spines, only the thrill of discovery. Most of them reproduce and do not believe there is anything questionable in doing so. _(REN: 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Ordinary folk who have nothing to do with supernaturalism and the uncanny and who are resistant to the pessimism of fictions like Invasion of the Body Snatchers and The Thing, whose principals all suffer death or deformation in their fight to hang on to their lives and their humanity. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- that you are nothing but a human puppet would not be impossible to believe. What now? Answer: Now you go insane. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In the recumbence of depression, your information-gathering system collates its intelligence and reports to you these facts: (1) there is nothing to do; (2) there is nowhere to go; (3) there is nothing to be; (4) there is no one to know. _(REN: (Unassigned))_
- In perfect knowledge there is only perfect nothingness, which is perfectly painful if what you want is meaning in your life. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- This is the great lesson the depressive learns: Nothing in the world is inherently compelling. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism)_
- As a threat to human continuance, nihilism is as dead as God. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface)_
- Key to Nietzsche’s popularity with atheistic amoralists is his materialistic mysticism, a sleight of mind that makes the world’s meaninglessness into something meaningful and refashions fate into freedom before our eyes. _(REN: 1. Nihilism Preface, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 5. Startling Encounter with Infinite Nothingness)_
- No other life forms know they are alive, and neither do they know they will die. This is our curse alone. Without this hex upon our heads, we would never have withdrawn as far as we have from the natural...Simply put: We are not from here. If we vanished tomorrow, no organism on this planet would miss us. Nothing in nature needs us. _(REN: 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other)_
- Each breath could be our last. Under such an arrangement, we would either have to become Epicureans and not fear death or, more likely, we would divert from our consciousness the thought that we could die without so much as a heads-up and in the blink of an eye. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- ontological despair, _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_
- No self now, consciously speaking. No feeling your old self or new self, false imaginings if you think about it, self-conscious nothings everywhere you look. No one to hear you weep or scream, making a go of it on your own, bye-bye. No bosom of nature, abandoned on the doorstep of the supernatural, minds full of flagrantly joyless possibilities, a real blunder that was, the human tragedy. No reality to speak of, nobody here but us puppets, contradictory beings, mutants who embody the contorted logic of a paradox. No immortality, ordinary folk and average mortals coming and going, can’t stay long, got an appointment with nonexistence, no alternative to consider, being alive was all right while it lasted, so they say. No life story with a happy ending to tell, only a contrivance of horror, then nothingness— and nothing else. No Free Will-to-live, no redemption by a Will-to-die, how depressing. No philosophies to peddle, pessimism a no-sale, optimism had to close its doors, too wicked to pass code. No meanings or mind-games, repressional mechanisms broke down, self-deception shuttered its windows. No awakening from a dream within a dream, mutation of consciousness— parent of all horrors, best not mess with it, extinction looking better all the time. No more pleasure, what there was of it, a few crumbs left by chaos at feast, still a good supply of pain, though. No praiseworthy incentives, just bowel-movement pressures, potato-mashing relativism. No euthanasia, bad for the business of life, you’re on your own there, but watch out for the eternal return, most horrible idea in the universe. No loving God, omnipotence off duty and omniscience on leave, the deity He dead— the horror, the horror, even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison, blame it on the piecing together of dissociated knowledge. No compassionate Buddha, Body Snatchers got him, heard tell, or some kind of thing, maybe next lifetime. No Good-versus-Evil formulas around here, Azathoth running the show, human beings a mistake or a joke, something pernicious making a nightmare of our world. No being normal and real, the uncanny coming at you full speed, startling and dreadful. No ego-death— enlightenment by accident. No way out of harm’s way, better never to have been, worst saved for last. No Last Messiah, buried in the fingernails of midwives and pacifier makers, gone the way of messiahs past. No bleakness either, a failure indeed. No terror management by isolation, anchoring, distraction, sublimation. No tragedies to read or to write, death kept at a safe distance past the vanishing point down the road. No escape routes into a useless bliss, useless existence, malignantly so… _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience, 3. Uncanny Illusion of Naturalism, 4. Madness, Nonexistence and the Other, 6. Symbolic Resonance of Nothing)_
- Some morbid citizens among us might become cataleptic with anxiety because their next breath may be their last, but most of us would not be wrecked by such unremitting worry. _(REN: 2. Abyssal Experience)_